
~ inner's
guide to

•

TONI TURNER

IJ
Adams Media Corporation
Avon, Massachusetts


Copyright ©2002, Toni Turner. All rights reserved.
This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form
without permission from the publisher; exceptions are made for brief
excerpts used in published reviews.
Published by
Adams Media Corporation
57 Littlefield Street, Avon, MA 02322. U.S.A.

www.adamsmedia.com
ISBN: 1-58062-570-3
Printed in Canada.
JIHGFEDCBA
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Turner, Toni.
A beginner's guide to short-term trading I by Toni Turner.
p. cm.
Includes index.
ISBN 1-58062-570-3
1. Speculation. 2. Stocks--Charts, diagrams, etc.
3. Stock price forecasting. 4. Investment analysis. I. Title.
HG6041 .T87
2001
332.63'228--dc21
2001046345
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
legal, accounting, or other professional advice. If legal advice or other expert assistance is required,
the services of a competent professional person should be sought.
-From a Declaration ofPrinciples jointly adopted by a Committee of the American Bar
Association and a Committee of Publishers and Associations
RealTick® is a registered trademark of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. © 1986-2002. All rights reserved.
Any unauthorized reproduction, alteration, or use of RealTick is strictly prohibited. Authorized use
of ,RealTick does not constitute an endorsement by Townsend Analytics of this book. Townsend
Analytics does not guarantee the accuracy of or warrant any representations made in this book.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed
as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this book and Adams Media was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been printed in initial capital letters.

This book is available at quantity d!scounts for bulk purchases.

For information, call 1-800-872-5627.
Visit our exciting small business Web site at businesstown.com


I dedicate this book to my students, worldwide. You have become
my teachers and my friends. Thank you for your unending gifts
ofsupport and encouragement, laughter, and inspiration!


Contents
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . • • . • • • • • • xi
FOREWORD BY STEVE NISON ••••.•••••••••••••••••••••••• xiii
INTRODUCTION ••••••••.••••••••••••••••••.•••••••••••• xv

America's Love Affair; How the Romance Began; The Internet Played Cupid;
Enter the Day Traders; My Relationship with the Stock Market; Why I Wrote
This Book; Strategy Overview; What You'll Need to Succeed; Short-Term
Trading: The Good News; The Flip Side; The Journey . .. ; It's Showtime!
CHAPTER1-WALLSTREEn
THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH. • • • . • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • • 1

Where It All ~tarted; Out of Chaos Comes O~der: The 'Crash of 1929; The
Crash of 1987: More Chaos and the Resulting Order; The New York Stock
~xchange: How It Works; The Nasdaq Stock Market: How It" Works; The
American Stock Exchange LLC: How It Works; Let's Dissect the Indexes;
Wall Street as "The Animal House": The Bulls and the Bears, the Sheep and
the Hogs; Two Emotions That Rule the Markets (and Most ofthe Rest ofthe
World); Supply and Demand; Check Your Understanding; What Is "Center
Point"?; Center Point: You . .. A Golden Buddha
CHAPTER 2-0FF TO A RUNNING START:
SETTING UP YOUR BUSINESS•••••••••••••••••••••.•••• 17

Map Your Business Plan; What's Your Time Commitment? Your Most
Important Commitment: Money; Quick Asset Allocation Plan;
Selecting/Updating Your Office Equipment; Choosing a Broker; The
Commission Maze; Slippage: What It Means; Margin Accounts: How They
Work; You Gotta Have Goals; Check Your Understanding; Center Point:
Commit: Transform Your Dreams into Goals

vii


viii

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

CHAPTER 3-MASTER A MONEY-MAKING MINDSET••••••.•••.•• 33

The Market as an Unstructured Entity; The Stock Market Is Always Right;
Meet Your Emotions-Up Close and Personal; The Winning Mindset-Train
Your Brain; The End Result: What It Looks Like; R & R: Don't Go Shopping
Without It; Self-Respect and Deservability; Check Your Understanding;
Center Point: Make Your Circle Bigger
CHAPTER 4-MARKET MACHINATIONS 101:
THE FUEL THAT SPARKS THE ENERGY••••••••••••••••••• 45

The Buck Stops Here; Fundamental Analysis vs. Technical Analysis: The Tug
o 'War; Fundamental Analysis, Quick Yet Thorough Sources; IBD
Proprietary Corporate Ratings; More Instant Info, CNBC, CNN, and
Bloomberg; Wonderful Web Sites to Wander Through; Magazines; Check
Your Understanding; Center Point: Invite Spontaneity into Your Life
CHAPTER 5-MARKET MACHINATIONS 102:
BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES THAT MAKE YOU MONEY •.•• 55

Cycles: The World's Operating System; Let's Draw the Curtain on Stage
Analysis; Different Stages Call for Different Reactions; Additional Cycle .
Components; Support and Resistance, or Action and Reaction; Quiz; Center
Point: Develop a Prosperity Mindset
CHAPTER &-JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS ••••••••••••• 73

Charting Essentials: Line Charts and Bar Charts; Candlestick Charting
Basics; Quiz; Center Point: Reach for Your Highest Potential
CHAPTER 7-eHARTING CLOSE-UPS:
THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE ••••.••••••••••••••••••.•• "93

Anatomy ofYour Friend: The Uptrend; Buy Signals: What to Look For; How
to Draw an Uptrend Line; Trading in a Range, Congestion, and
Consolidation; Anatomy of a Downtrend; Overview of Sell Signals: What to
Look For; How to Draw a Downtrend Line; Quiz; Center Point: The Power
ofSynchronicity
CHAPTER 8-PUTTING THE PUZZLE TOGETHER • • • • • • • • . . • . . • 119

Volume: A Mega-Important Indicator; Moving Averages: What They Are,
How to Use Them; Quiz; Center Point: Thoughts Are "Things"


ix

CHAPTER 9-THE BELLS AND WHISTLES:
HOW THEY CHIME AND TWEET. • • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • 135

Oscillators: What They Are; The RSI, What It Is, How to Use It; Stochastic
Oscillator: What It Is, How to Use It; The MACD: What It Is, How It Works;
On-Balance Volume: What It Is, How to Read It; Bollinger Bands: What They
Are, How to Read Them; Fibonacci Retracements: What They Are, How You
Read Them; Gaps: A Trader's Black Hole; Quiz; Center Point: You Are
Perfect Right Now!
CHAPTER 1O-IT'S SHOWTIME! ••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 157

Continuation and Reversal Patterns: What They Are; Reversal Patterns: What
They Look Like; Let's Take Itfrom the Top!; Big Picture Dynamics; Choose a
Leading Stock in a Leading Industry, Check Out the Fundamentals; The
Industry Group or Sector Shows Immediate Strength; Indicators." All Systems
Are Go!; The Urge to Fudge; Get Ready to Pull the Trigger: The Buy Setup;
Buy Trigger List; Quiz; Center Point: Awaken to Forgiveness
CHAPTER ii-WHERE THE RUBBER MEETS THE ROAD:
MONEY-MANAGEMENT TECHNIQUES •.•••• •' • • • • • • • • • • • • 183

Plan Your Trade and Trade Your Plan; Piece of the Pie; RiskIReward Ratio:
What It Means, How to Calculate It; Where to Place Your Stop-Loss Orders;
Now That You've Got It, What Do You Do with It?; Intra-day Reversal
Periods: What They Are, What They Mean to You; Market Orders, Limit
Orders, and More; Quiz; Center Point: The Circle of Giving
CHAPTER 12-WINNING STRATEGIES FOR SELLING SHORT ••••• 199

Overcoming Mental and Emotional Roadblocks to Selling Short; Selling
Short: The Rules; Here's the Process; What Makes Your Shorts Fall Down;
Fundamentals: What to Look For; Chart Patterns and Setups: What to Look
For; Shorting Indicators: Ugly Is Good!; How to Place Your Order; Shorting
Strategy: The Overextended Stock; Shorting Strategy: The Overextended
Double Top; Sell Short Trigger List; Shorting Tips: FAQs (Frequently Asked
Questions); Quiz; Center Point: Banish Fear and Let Your Light Shine


x

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

CHAPTER 13-ANATOMY OF A TRADE •.••••••••••••••.••••• 219

Find an Industry Group or Sector to Target; The Preparation; The Journey;
The Rest of the Story . ..; A Quick Look at Intra-day Charts; Center Point:
Detachment Brings New Possibilities
CHAPTER 14-YOU, THE WIZARD OF ODDS •••••••••••••••••• 237

Back up and Look at the Big Picture; The "If, Then" Mindset; Analyze the
Broader Markets; Learn to Assess the Trading Environment; The
AdvancelDecline Line: Market Narrator in a Capsule; A "Heads Up" on
Economic and Earnings Reports; Options Expiration Day-You're Outta'
Here!; FOMC Reports; Mother Market's Contrarian Indicators; Stay Tuned
to Changing Conditions; A Word about Losses; The Best Gift to Give
Yourse If..' A Trading Journal; Level-II Trading: Is It for You?; Quiz; Center
Point: Come Back to Center
GLOSSARY OF TRADING AND FINANCIAL TERMS ••••••••••••• 253
RECOMMENDEI) READING ••••••.••••••••••••••••••.••••• 273
INDEX ••••••••••••••••••••••••••.••••••••••••••.••••• 275


Acknowledgments

If ever a book was created out of patience and love, this is the one!
I consider myself blessed to have been surrounded by so many people who
gave of their encouragement and support while I wrote this manuscript. My thanks
and gratitude to ...
First and always, my daughter Adrienne, who is the light of my life and my
best friend.
My agent, Deidre Knight, the best ally an author could have, along with
being a business partner, friend, and mother of another beautiful soul, Tyler.
My editor, Gary Krebs, who helped shape and mold this book into final
form, editorial assistant Elizabeth Gilbert, whose patience shall endear her to me
forever, business. editor Jill Alexander, and another patient soul, Copy Chief
Laura MacLaughlin.
Harold Komhaus, who offered constant support and lots of hugs.
Best friends Dan Gibby, David Kohn, and Vince Shorb, who gave wise
advice, along with gentle, much-needed prods when I slowed down.
Mark Frauman, mentor and friend, as well as Mike McMahon, Cathy Vlad,
Jennifer Perrier, Claud "OEX" Staples, and Chris Dover.
Dr. Dale Townsend of Tesserack, along with my wonderful friends, the "Hot
Dogs," who motivated me and pushed me to the outside of my personal envelope.
My Internet group, who gather each day for "Toni on Trading." They have
become like family.
Again, thank you all, and God bless!

xi


1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

-'I
1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

j ,

1

1

1

'I
1
-

1

1

1

1

--

I


Foreword

I had the pleasure of frrst meeting Toni when she introduced herself to me after I
gave an online trading seminar. Toni told me how important candle charts are to
her. Immediately, I knew she was intelligent, perceptive, generous, and with excellent taste. But then again, I might be biased..
All kidding aside, I have to be honest and say that when I first met her, I was
outside of the publi~ speaking circuit (all my seminars previously had only been for
financial institutions). I did not recognize her name, nor know how popular she was.
Her name, though, did sound familiar for some reason. I soon realized why.
I had purchased her online trading book, A Beginner.'s Guide to Day Trading
Online, a few months previously. Toni flattered me by asking for a foreword to this
book. I can think of no better testimonial than saying ~at before I knew who she
was, I had gone to many bookstores to find just the right online trading book, and
ultimately chose hers above all the others.
The reason I selected that book is the same reason I recommend this one: It
has the perfect blend of the tools and psychological components needed to win
your daily trading battles.
Toni has a sentence in this book: "I traveled a challenging road to learn this
business, and now you can profit from my mistakes." This brings to mind a
Japanese proverb, "If you wish to know the road, inquire of those who have traveled it." I can recommend no better guide than Toni to lead you down the road to
successful online trading.
-STEVE NISON
PRESIDENT OF CANDLECHARTS.COM
AUTHOR OF JAPANESE CANDLESTICK CHARTING
TECHNIQUES AND BEYOND CANDLESTICKS

xiii


"j


Introduction

AMERICA'S LOVE AFFAIR

America's having a love affair with the stock market-a big, juicy love affair! Dh,
to be sure, this affair has its ups and downs, and our emotions run the gamut from
rosy to rocky, but it's a love affair, pure and simple!
And what a wild and fickle lover our temptress is. She's gentle and considerate one minute, then witchy and irritable the next. She's apt to treat good news
like poison, and wave off bad news like no news at all. A mere word (read: inflation) sends her to the depths of despair, while the rumor of war may turn her giddy
with delight. She's rude and bossy, genteel and loving. Her moods ricochet
between selfish and generous, hostile and benign, pessimistic and euphoric.
Did she give you a present? Or take away more than you wanted to give?
Your gratitude or groans are equally ignored. She ~aughs when you cry, and smirks
at your happiness.
When at last you stalk off in anger, she waits for the right moment, then lures
you back into her arms, whispering sweet promises you can't refuse.

HOW THE ROMANCE BEGAN

America's infatuation with the stock market started with the inception of the
"great bull market" that has stretched over the last decade. During this time, stock
market returns have exceeded most investments in alternative financial instruments, such as bonds and real estate.
Increased volatili~y, or price swings, are the order of the day. In the early to
mid-1990s, if the Dow Jones Industrial Average fluctuated 100 points or more,
we watched in amazement. Today, 1DO-point swings for this venerable index is
the norm.
As we catapult into the twenty-first century, those who have learned how to
capitalize on the market's volatile price swings are pocketing hefty profits. With

xv


xvi

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

some stocks rising multiple points a day, then plummeting as quickly, nimble
players have learned to capitalize on both upward and downward movements by
buying during the dips and selling during the rallies.
THE INTERNET PLAYED CUPID

The advent of the Internet contributed gre~tly to our inf~tuation with the stock
market. Suddenly, we Americans were spending more time in front of our computer monitors than in front of our television sets.
The mighty Web transformed global communications, and in doing so, liberated us to think and act for ourselves with regard to our financial affairs. No longer
did we have to rely on financial advisors to mail us an analyst's report about a
company. All the finan~ial data we could ever hope to digest lay right at our fingertips. Stock research reports, detailing news, fundamentals, institutional holdings, and proprietary rankings, were ours for the price of a mouse click.
As more and more of us decided to take control of our portfolios, brokerage
houses soon got the picture by offering us the opportunity to purchase and sell
equities online. Since we were conducting our own research, we had no intention
of paying big commissions to have the trade made. Discount brokers offered
slashed commissions, and many large brokerage houses followed their lead.
Except for those traders/investors who are still willing to pay for the luxury of a
full-service broker, three-digit commission schedules have dissolved. Today's
commissions average $12 per transaction, down from $48 in 1996.
As of this writing, online brokerages now manage 18 million accounts, with
1.06 million transactions conducted daily via the Internet. Estimates predict the
total number of online accounts will double by 2003. Retail trades placed online
(as opposed to orders placed via telephone) grew from 17 percent in 1997 to 43
percent in 1999. By the end of 2000, that number topped 50 percent.
ENTER THE DAY TRADERS

Toward the end of the decade, day traders flocked to the market in droves, attracted
by narrower spreads (the difference between a stock's purchase and selling price),
ECNs (electronic communications networks, think "stock swaps"), and the availability of sophisticated order-entry systems that give direct access to exchange
floors. Some of those traders took home big bucks. Others crashed and burned!
These hopefuls were sure they'd be rich overnight, so they jumped headfirst into
the most challenging arena on earth, with little knowledge, less discipline, and no
experience.


INTRODUCTION

xvii

They blew out their accounts faster than you can say "buy high, sell low."
The stock market saw them coming. She bided her time, then laughed, and
ate them for breakfast. Just as quickly, she spit them out, minus their money and
self-esteem.
Fortunately, a group of us who decided to buy and sell stocks on an active basis
did so with a bit more caution and a lot more work. We survived the training period
and emerged as self-reliant traders who consistently take money out of the markets.

MY RELATIONSHIP WITH THE STOCK MARKET

1 started investing more than thirteen years ago, and quickly decided that if 1 were
going to support myself from my investments, 1 would have to know as much as
my stockbroker. Most brokers haven't the time to dote on our portfolios the way
we do-or, rather, should.
. Five years ago, 1 became an active trader. For the next year and a half, 1 made
tons of mistakes. The market slapped me around, big time!
Although 1 kept losing money, 1 white-knuckled it, refusing to give up. 1
watched CNBC until my eyes crossed. At night, 1 studied charts until 1 toppled
out of my chair. 1 read every book about trading I could get my hands on. 1 traveled to New York, studied under top traders who became my mentors, and
asked so many questions 1 drove those around me bananas. Finally, 1 crawled
out of the learning curve-victorious. 1 knew how to. take consistent profits out
of the market.
My friends, relieved that 1 survived the fiery trial, suggested that 1 could help
others who wanted to learn how to trade. 1 agreed, and combining my writing
background (I had been a professional writer for fourteen years) with my trading
skills, 1 wrote A Beginner's Guide to Day Trading Online. Published by Adams
Media in March 2000, the book became a bestseller in the day trading field.
Now, when 1 speak in public, 1 tell my audiences that 1hold stocks from "two
minutes to two years," and 1 do. My favorite time frames, however, are those that
"target swing trading and position trading, the subjects of this book. When properly executed, these two styles of trading put you in the market when the "getting's
. good," and keep you on the sidelines when the market corrects.
WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK

Once you learn the principles of short-term trading, defined in this book as swing
and position trading, you can make the most amount of money with the least
amount of time and risk!


xviii

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

.. If you. day trade, you can make quick profits; however, during market
hours, you have to stay glued to your computer screen. You must cultivate
the concentration level of a rocket scientist, and the bladder of a camel.
.. The traditional investing stance of "buy-and-hold'" has lost much of its
sanctity. With a few exceptions, gone are the days when you could buy a
national icon of American industry and rest secure in the knowledge that it
would pay for your offspring's college education, or your retirement condo
in Florida.
... When executed properly, the styles known as swing trading (intended hold,
two to five days) and position trading (intended hold, four to eight weeks)
can deliver the juiciest gains with the least amount of risk.
STRATEGY OVERVIEW

Here's the strategy: Just like everything else on Uris planet, stock prices move in
cycles. You'll learn about these in detail later, but for now, know that four stages
make up a cycle.
In your mind, picture a valley, then a hill that rises and falls down into another
valley. Now, overlay a stock price pattern onto the topography. The stock bases in
the valley, then breaks into an uptrend (side of the hill) that may last from weeks
to months. Mter the uptrend exhausts itself, the price action moves sideways, usually for a shorter time period (top of the hill). When buyers refuse to purchase the
, stock at higher prices, the stock "rolls over" into a downtrend (other side of the
hill). When the downtrend finally ends, usually near the previous valley price, the
cycle is complete and a new cycle begins.
As relatively short-term traders, our money-making goal will be to grab the
middle-or "sweet spot"-of a stock's uptrend (or downtrend). We'll know when
to enter a stock, when to exit, and when to stand on the sidelines. Since you can
apply these principles to any style of trading, that's priceless knowledge no matter
what time frame you play!
WHAT YOU'LL NEED TO SUCCEED

Office requirements for trading are basic, and you probably have most of it in
place. Plan to equip a quiet corner or office with an up-to-date computer (including
a fast, reliable connection to the Internet) and a television.
Perhaps the biggest requirement is that you. must commit a chunk of your
most precious commodity-time. Learning how to pull consistent proceeds from
the toughest playing field in the world takes dedication and persistence. But it's
worth it!


INTRODUCTION

xix

SHORT-TERM TRADING: THE GOOD NEWS

Maybe you're a professional in your field, an entrepreneur, a retiree, a student, or
a homemaker. You've probably observed the stock market and realized tidy profits
can be made from the market's current volatility. Whether you plan to trade on a
full-time or part-time basis, the benefits of trading are fantastic.
If you make trading your full-time occupation, you can choose when, where,
and if you choose to work. You can trade from any location, as long as your comp~ter is hooked up to the Internet. Office politi~s? There are none. A persnickety
boss? You're the boss! Want to wear your bunny slippers to work? Do it! Catch
the flu? Pull the covers over your head and stay in bed for as long as you want.
Got the time and money to take a week off? Have fun!
If you'd rather trade part-time, harmonize it with your regular job and add
"luxury" money to your wallet.
When you learn how to trade cautiously and wisely, your earnings may transform dreams into real rewards, such as the sailboat you always wanted, the vacation cottage in the mountains, or a college education for your children.
Here's a benefit some folks don't think of: When executed properly, shortterm trading can have lower risk than long-term investing. Many traditional
buy-and-holders ride out bear markets fully invested, gritting their teeth while
they watch their capital shrivel in value.
Now you will know when to go "flat," or close all of your positions. You'll
calmly put your holdings in cash during corrections and/or bear markets. And,
you'll have lots of money to shop with, when the bulls once again take control.
THE FLIP SIDE

The stock market is the most challenging arena on earth. It takes no prisoners.
It's a dog-eat-dog world, and only the fittest survive. Those who jump in
without adequate knowledge or discipline usually get their heads handed to
them in a hurry!
To compete in this field, you have to be willing to persist and study hard. You
have to cultivate the nerves of a bomb-detonator and develop the discipline of a
marine corps drill sergeant.
Short-term trading is riskier than socking your money into fixed income
returns, such as Treasury bonds or money market funds. And the truth is, you
will-especially at the beginning of the learning curve-experience losses. (The
size of the losses are within your control.) Are you highly risk-averse? Does the
thought of losing money send you running for the Maalox bottle? If so, you may
want to choose a different investing avenue.


xx

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Are you naturally a disciplined person? Can you control your emotions, or do
you let your impulses run away with you? Market players who rake in the big
bucks trade like steely-eyed robots, sans emotions. Can you develop that attitude?
When you first step into trading, remember the adage "Speed kills." Are you
willing to enter the market at a turtle's pace and take small profits while you learn
how the game is played? As a wise trader, are you primed to observe, apply your
knowledge, plan your next step, and then take that step while adhering strictly to
your plan? That's how the pros fatten their wallets, and if you follow in their footsteps, you can join them at the top.
Short-term trading isn't for everyone. So, ask yourself the preceding questions before you plunk your money into the pot. Self-examination isn't always the
easiest thing to do, but it rewards us by 'keeping us on" a path that best suits our individual needs.

THE JOUR"EY •••

In the pages that follow, I'll give you an overview of the most exciting street on
earth-Wall Street. Then, we'll talk about setting up your trading business, delve
into winning market psychology, and discuss fundamental and technical analyses.
You'll learn how to read chart patterns, how to choose stocks, and how to play
them. You'll also master money-management techniques. (It's easy to buy a
stock-the skill comes in knowing when to sell It.) We'll also discuss news and
recurring market events, and how to interpret them. Most importantly, we're going
to have fun along the way.
I'm going to talk to you as one friend talks to another-as though we're good
buddies chatting over a cup of coffee. I promise you this: Every sentence in this
book comes from my heart. I traveled a challenging road to learn this business, and
now you can profit from my mistakes. In the following pages, you'll learn how to
dodge market potholes and seize gains by using wisdom and common sense.
Believe me, if I can do it-you can do it.
IT'S SHOWTIME!

Okay, guys and girlfriends, here's where the rubber meets the road. It's time for
you to decide whether or not short-term trading is for you. Only you can make
this decision.
Again, you're going to need a frrm commitment-from yourself, to yourself-of time and money. If you decide to join me on this journey, let's get going.
Hang on tight, 'cause it's going to be the most exciting ride of your life.
Good luck and good trading!



A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

MEET JESSE LIVERMORE •••

If ever a book has been recognized as the "bible" of this industry, it's
Reminiscences ofa Stock Operator. Originally published in 1923, it is the classic
story of Jesse Livermore, a legendary, tum-of-the-century trader.
The author, Edwin Lefevre, interviewed Livermore for several weeks. Then,
giving Livermore the pseudonym of Larry Livingston, Lefevre did a masterful job
of capturing Livermore'S' thoughts and recollections of his trading career.
Now, more than seventy years after Livermore made and lost fortunes trading
commodities and stocks in rowdy bucket shops, his observations ring true and
accurate. You'll find one at the beginning of each chapter. Enjoy them, reflect upon
them, and integrate them into your trading career.


CHAPTER

1

Wall Street: The Greatest
Game on Earth

The game taught me the game.
-JESSE LIVERMORE

Wall Street and the financial markets represent a global tournament played with heart-stopping stakes, in which people from'
the world over come together to trade money for dreams.
Will humans ever stop trading? Doubtful. No matter whether
the assets involved are tangible or intangible~ the act of trading
seems inherent to our very souls.
WHERE IT ALL STARTED

Mankind's love of trading-or swapping items of equal value-started with our
earliest ancestors, Oorg and Grok, who decided to swap meat for fish and furs. As
Oorg and Grok's thought processes evolved into more complex frames of reference, their trading systems evolved along with them. Now, we, as contemporary
men and women, have transformed the exchange of goods of perceived equal
value into a sophisticated art form that involves all sorts of maneuvering.
The first actual stock exchange opened its doors in 1602 in Amsterdam,
Holland. It was called the Dutch Bourse (bourse means moneybag), and it was
backed by the Dutch East India Company.
The U.S. financial center, Wall Street, literally has its roots in an earthen
embankment, erected in 1644 to keep the cows from wandering around the
southern tip of the farmland now known as Manhattan. In 1663, Governor Peter
Stuyvesant of New York (then called New Amsterdam) ordered that the embankment be raised and fortified with logs to protect colonists from the British, whom
he suspected would attack New York by land. The British, however, arrived in
1644 by sea. They captured the settlement without firing a shot. Later, the British

1


2

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

burned the ramshackle wall. The street that ran alongside survived, though, and
retained its name: Wall Street.
The securities plarkets in the United States began with speculative trading in the
debts of the new colonie.s and government. When the first Congress met in New York's
Federal Hall in 1789, it issued roughly $80 million in government notes, creating an
exciting new market in securities. These securities, along with additional stocks, bonds,
orders for commodities, and warehouse receipts were put up for sale to the public.
To participate in these markets, investors funded American companies by
buying shares of ownership. In this way, common citizens had "equity" and could
prove so by the "certificates of stock" issued by the company in exchange for capital given by the investor. The stock proved the investor's participation, and so
secured the debt. That's why shares of stock are alternately called stocks, equities,
and securities.
In 1791, the first U.S. stock exchange was established in Philadelphia. At the
same time, New York City's exchange was more informal; traders gathered each day
under the sycamore tree at 68 Wall Street to buy and sell.
The New York Exchange began trading formally in 1792, when two dozen brokers formed a club. Competition was fierce. The brokers focused on padding their
own profits and commissions, rather than on their customers. When the public
rebelled, the brokers regrouped and instituted brokerage houses that offered stocks
to the public at fair prices.
In 1827, the new· Merchants Exchange building, erected at Wall and Hanover
streets, housed the New York Stock and Exchange Board. By 1842, the American Stock
Exchange opened its doors, and the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) adopted its
present name. Both exchanges enforced strict rules governing the sale of stocks.
In ~e early 1900s, leading up to the Crash of 1929, "bucket shops" flourished.
These independent businesses provided opportunities for individual traders and
investors to speculate on the price of securities by tossing money into a bucket carried around by a clerk.
The action in these shops-most of which were unlicensed and illegal-ran
fast and furious. One clerk read the ticker tape while another jotted prices on a
chalkboard. The speculators bought and sold the stocks as clerks called out prices
from the "ticker," a nonstop telegram.
The honesty of the shop operators determined how much money the traders
won or lost, and honesty was a rare commodity. As "Larry Livingston," the character who represents the tum-of-the-century trader Jesse Livermore in Edwin
Lefevre's Reminiscences ofa Stock Operator, lamented, "There are no bucket shops
here [in New York] that a fellow could trust."t
1Lefevre, Edwin. Reminiscences ofaStock Operator, p. 22 (NY: John Wiley &Sons, Inc. 1994).


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

3

In the 1930s, the exchanges became strictly regulated and evolved into premier financial centers: the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE, or the Big Board),
the Nasdaq Stock Exchange, and the American Stock Exchange LLC (now part of
the Nasdaq). Regional exchanges include the Pacific Stock Exchange (PSE), the
Boston Stock Exchange (BaS), the Philadelphia Stock Exchange (PHLX),
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT, which trades commodities), and Chicago Board
Options Exchange (CBOE, which trades options).
As previously mentioned, the floors of the New York Stock Exchange and the
American Stock Exchange are located in New York City. The Nasdaq Stock
Exchange doesn't have an actual trading "floor"; rather, it's an electronic market
housed in a computer network in Trumbull, Connecticut.

OUT OF CHAOS COMES ORDER: THE CRASH OF 1929

The Crash of 1929, and the Great Depression that followed it, transformed
America'~ way of transacting business. In 1934, Congress established the U.S.
regulatory commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), after the
Senate Committee on Banking and Currency looked into the New York Stock
Exchange's operations.
The NYSE's business conduct had been a bit dicey, to say the least. To ensure
that another market crash would not take place, the newly formed SEC instituted
sweeping regulations. Its mission was to restore investor confidence by ending
misleading sales practices and stock manipulations that fueled the collapse of the
1929 crash.
Once in gear, the SEC established regulations that propibited the purchasing
of equities without having adequate funds to cover the transaction. Next, it provided for the registration and supervision of all U.S. securities markets and stockbrokers, wrote rules for solicitation of proxies, and prevented unfair use of
nonpublic information in stock trading. The organization stipulated that a company
offering securities make full public disclosure of all relevant data. Finally, the commission decided to act as advisor to the court in corporate bankruptcy cases.
The most recent ruling by the SEC is Regulation PD. It stipulates that if a publicly traded company discloses material nonpublic information to securities professionals, such as fund managers, it must also '?lake public disclosure. Translation:
Great Big Company Inc. can't slip privileged information about a new product to
its favorite fund manager, unless it first broadcasts that same information to the
public via a Web cast, conference call, or other public announcement.
Okay, back to the calendar. In 1971, the National Association of Securities
Dealers (NASD) created a fully integrated, computerized trading system called
the NASDAQ, or National Association of Securities Dealers Automated


4

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Quotation. Its purpose was to automate and trade over-the-counter securities, and
it linked the terminals of more than 500 market makers to its automated system in
Connecticut. By the 1990s, the Nasdaq grew into the second-largest securities
market in the United States, and the third largest in the world.

THE CRASH OF 1987: MORE CHAOS AND THE RESULTING ORDER

During the 1970s and 1980s, the exchanges rotated between bull and bear markets
until the collapse of October 19, 1987. The "crash" caused America's investing
public to panic. Frightened customers overwhelmed their stockbrokers with sell
orders, yelling, "Just get me out." Stockbrokers flooded speci~sts and market
makers with these frantic orders. At one point, some market makers stopped
answering their phones-which caused frustrated stockbrokers to stop answering
their phones, in tum causing some investors to ride it out.
. After the panic subsided, the SEC once again executed new regulations to
protect the individual investor. The organization ruled that when individual
investors wanted to sell, Nasdaq market makers had to buy a specified amount of
stock from them. Later, additional regulations allowed investors to participate in
the market by connecting them directly to the market via their computers and the
Internet, and market makers were required to handle the transactions. Just like specialists on the NYSE, market makers were responsible for conducting "fair and
orderly" markets.

THE NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE: HOW IT WORKS

In terms of market capitalization, the New York Stock Exchange (www.nyse.com) is
the largest stock market in the world. That's why it's also termed "the Big Board."
Located at Broad and Wall Streets, it is called the "Sunshine Market" because the
public can always view its trading floor through gallery windows. CNBC and other
financial television networks televise the busy floor each morning.
The NYSE lists more than 3,000 companies, representing in excess of 253
billion shares of stock, valued at over $11 trillion. These equities are referred to as
"listed stocks" and most have large market capitalizations. "Market cap" is measured by an equity's number of shares outstanding (shares available to the public
not held by corporate insiders) multiplied by the price of a single share of stock.
For example, as of this writing, industry titan General Electric (OE) has 9,908 million s~ares outstanding. The price per share is approximately $50. So GE's market
cap is a whopping $495,400,000,000!
You may have heard GE referred to as "the bluest of the blue chips." Trivia
lovers take note: The term "blue chip," a moniker applied to the thirty stocks that
make up the Dow Jones Industrial Average, comes from the game of poker. Of the


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

5

chips used to represent dollar valuations, the blue chip has the highest value of
all: $500.
Within the New York Stock Exchange, a number of major indices give us
daily clues as to the inner workings of the market. The most famous, of course, is
the one just mentioned, the Dow Jones Industrial Average.
The 105-year-old "Dow," as we call it in Street short-speak, started with
twelve stocks and now consists of thirty reigning icons of American industry.
. Traditionally, only NYSE stocks were appointed to the Dow. In the last couple of
years, however, Intel (INTC) and Microsoft (MSFT), two of the 800-pound tech
gorillas that led the Nasdaq to dizzying heights in the late 1990s, were appointed
to the index.
Other important indices within the NYSE are the Dow Jones Transportation
Index, consisting of twenty leading transportation stocks, and the Dow Jones
Utility Index, comprised of fifteen utility stocks.
The NYSE operates on a centralized auction system. Different "posts," each
representing a different stock, pepper the floor of the exchange. At each post, a
specialist (read "auctioneer") conducts a two-way auction between buyers and
sellers and provides a market for that. stock. Only one specialist represents each
stock; for example, GE has only one specialist. Specialists, however, can represent
more than one stock.

Where You Come In
Say you want to buy 100 shares of Citicorp, Inc. (C). Basically, your order
can be filled one of three ways:
1. You call your broker or you place the order through your online
broker. The broker sends your order to the floor of the NYSE. A floorbroker representing your broker takes your order to the post where
Citicorp is traded and asks the Citicorp specialist for a market. The
specialist announces the "size" of the market, or the number of
Citicorp shares offered for sale at the best price, and the number
wanted to buy at that best price. Your order is filled, and your broker
confirms the price to you
2. You give your broker the order by phone or Internet, and he or she enters
it onto a SuperDOT (designated order turnaround) machine, an electronic system that routes your order to the specialist. (SuperDOT handles
about 80 percent of all orders entered on the NYSE.) The specialist fills
it and shoots it back to the clerk. The clerk informs your broker of the
"fill" (the number of shares and the price at which your order was filled),
and your broker informs you.


6

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

3. You execute the order yourself on your direct-access trading (DAT) software system (described in the next chapter). This zaps the order from you
to the specialist, and you usually receive the fill information in less than
a minute.
When we say the specialist announces the "market" in Citicorp, an example
would be "48.88 x 49, size 5,000 x 10,000" (the "x" meaning "by"). Translation:
A buyer, or buyers, is waiting to buy a total of 5,000 shares of Citicorp and is
willing to pay $48.95 per share. A seller, or sellers, currently offers (wants to sell)
a total. of 10,000 shares at $49 per share.
The price difference between the best (lowest) price you can purchase the
stock for and ~e best (highest) price you will receive if you sell it is called the
"spread." In the previous example, it would come to five cents per share.
If stocks were people, NYSE stocks would bear the reputation of being haughty
statesmen and dignitaries. Perhaps, because their specialists are charged with
keeping "a fair and orderly market," listed stocks may have rapid price changes, but
most tend to step up and down their price ranges in a mannerly fashion.
If you're new to the stock market, I recommend you target NYSE issues for
your first trades. You'll be less prone to the eye-bugging, stomach-clutching
attacks that can be brought on by Nasdaq high-flyers.

THE NASDAQ STOCK MARKET: HOW IT WORKS

The Nasdaq Stock Market (www.nasdaq.com) is a shareholder-owned, for-profit
company consisting of two distinct and separate markets: the Nasdaq National
Market and the Nasdaq SmallCap Market.
The Nasdaq National Market is the one we usually refer to when we say, "the
Nasdaq." It currently lists nearly 5,000 companies with a combined market capitalization of nearly $6 trillion. Average daily share volume runs at about 1.7 billion, which occurs in nearly 10 million transactions per day!
The Nasdaq SmallCap Market is the smaller capitalization tier of the Nasdaq.
Companies that apply to be listed on this exchange must have a market cap of at
least $50 million.
By now, you've heard the Nasdaq referred to as "the tech-heavy Nasdaq."
Although Nasdaq companies cover the entire spectrum of the u.S. economy-from
banks to biotechnology to transportation-its staples are technology stocks. These
sectors include wireless telephone, software, computers, semi-conductors, and
broadband companies. Surely, you recognize some of the Nasdaq tech icons, such
as Cisco Systems (CSCO), Microsoft (MSFT), and Intel Corp. (lNTC).
Nasdaq stocks are the NYSE's rowdy cousins. As I said earlier, most NYSE
stocks tend to be purchased and sold in a somewhat genteel and dignified


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

7

manner. Rambunctious Nasdaq stocks, however, can trade like a raucous freefor-all. No doubt it's due to the way shares exchange hands. In comparison to
having a single specialist orchestrating every trade for a listed stock, a Nasdaq
stock may have as many as fifty or sixty market makers (think middlemen) and
ten ECNs (electronic communications networks, or trader "stock swaps") bidding on and offering it at any given moment. Prices can soar, then tumble, at
mind-numbing speed!
When you call your broker or go online and ask for a quote for Dell (DELL),
for instance, your answer might be "30.25 by 30.26." This means that 30.25 is the
"inside bid" or the highest price you can demand if you want to sell Dell as a
market order. Thirty dollars and 26 cents is the "inside offer" or the "ask."
("Offer" and "ask" are interchangeable terms.) They represent the lowest price for
which you can buy Dell if you want to buy at the market price. Remember, when
you get a quote from any exchange, whether verbal or written, the bid is always
announced first, the offer second.
If you're new at this game, please avoid trading explosive Nasdaq stocks until
you've got some experience under your belt. Believe me, these roller coasters can
give you-and your account-a white-knuckle ride you'll never forget!
THE AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE LLC: HOW IT WORKS

As the nation's second largest floor-based exchange and third most active
exchange, the American Stock Exchange LLC (www.amex.com) lists more than
800 common stocks, index shares, and equity derivative securities. Located at 86
Trinity Place (adjacent to Wall Street), Amex has buyers and sellers who compete
in a centralized auction marketplace similar to the NYSE. Stocks listed on the
Amex usually represent younger companies, and their prices are less volatile than
their NYSE and Nasdaq counterparts.
LET'S DISSECT THE INDEXES

As a savvy market participant, it's important that you get up to speed with the
indexes used by the financial markets as benchmarks.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average
The Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) is a price-weighted index of thirty
giants of American industry. Price-weighted means that higher-priced stocks
receive mor~ weighting than their lower-priced companions. Often called "Blue
Chips," the companies of the DnA include Microsoft, Intel, ffiM, General
Electric, and General Motors, among other big names. Prepared and published by
Dow Jones & Co., "the Dow," as we call it, is the oldest and most quoted of all


8

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

market indices. The average is calculated by adding the closing prices of the component stocks and using a divisor adjusted for splits and dividends equal to 10 percent or more of the market value of an issue. Just as with all of the averages
discussed here~ it's quoted in points (not dollars).

The NYSE Composite Index
The NYSE Composite Index is a market value-weighted index made up of
all NYSE issues. Market value weighted equals price weighted. Like the Dow,
each company's security affects the index in proportion to its market value, or
price" per share.

Standard & Poor's ·500 Index
Standard & Poor's 500 Index (SPX), commonly called the "S&P 500,"
and "the broader market," is a market capitalization-weighted index (shares
outstanding multiplied by stock price per share). Because this comprehensive
index currently tracks 400 industrial stocks, twenty transportation stocks, forty
financial stocks, and forty public utilities issues-representing stocks from the
NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq-it's a terrific benchmark of the American
economy. Standard and Poor's Corporation, a division of McGraw-Hill, maintains this index.

The Nasdaq 100 Index
The Nasdaq 100 Index includes 100 of the largest non-financial domestic companies listed on the Nasdaq National Market. Launched in January 1985, each security in the index is represented by its market capitalization in relation to the total
market value of the index. The index reflects the Nasdaq's largest growth companies across major industry groups. All index components have a minimum market
cap of $500 million and an average daily trading volume of at least i 00,000 shares.

The Nasdaq Composite Index
The Nasdaq Composite Index is a statistical measure that indicates changes
in the Nasdaq Stock Market by measuring all Nasdaq common stocks. It is
market-value weighted; the more expensive equities are given more weight than
lower-priced issues.

The Wilshire Total Market Index
The Wilshire Total Market is the broadest of indexes. It's a market valueweighted index of all U.S.-headquartered companies (currently about 6,800)
listed on the NYSE, Amex, and Nasdaq.


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

9

The Russell 2000 Index
The Russell 2000 represents the small-capitalization stock index. Some
gurus insist that the small caps lead us into-and out of-bear markets. So, it's
worth keeping an eye on this index. You can also compare your small-cap holdings, if any, to its trending action.
WALL STREET AS "THE ANIMAL HOUSE":
THE BULLS AND THE BEARS, THE SHEEP AND THE HOGS

Perhaps because the island of Manhattan previously served as farmland, Wall
Street's prominent players are still referred to with animal names. These "party
animals" have clear-cut characteristics.
Bulls fight by striking up with their horns. Therefore, stock market "bulls"
make money from advancing prices. During soaring markets, they profit from the
uptrend. When the market corrects or drops, bulls are the optimists who roar that,
"It will tum around soon."
Bears fight by striking down with their claws. Market "bears" make money
when the market falls. Many bears are short-sellers who profit from ugly downtrends by selling falling stocks and buying them back at an even lower price
(you'll learn how to sell short in Chapter 12). Whenever the market surges skyward, the pessimistic bears crawl out of their caves to growl that the good times
will be over soon.
Sheep follow anybody with a tambourine. Too lazy to learn for themselves,
they rush in and out of stock positions on the advice given by the guru du jour.
Listen to them bleating as their portfolios take a beating.
One of the oldest sayings on Wall Street goes, "The bulls make money, and
the bears make money, but the hogs get slaughtered." Count on it. Hogs always
get sliced into bacon. When piggies go to market, they load up on high-flying
issues that many times flop faster than they fly. Greedy gluttons also "bet the
ranch" on risky issues, or hold on when they could take reasonable gains. :Listen
to their squeals as the market chews up their account!
TWO EMOTIONS THAT RULE THE MARKETS
(AND MOST OF THE REST OF THE WORLD)

Two polar opposites reign side by side over the world's financial markets: greed
and fear. Faster and faster, this ruling duo passes the scepter back and forth,
inciting the volatility we witness-and participate in-each day.
To be sure, greed operates up and down the scale from mild optimism to
euphoria. Fear ranges from apprehension to outright panic. The degree to which


10

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

these two emotions exert power propels stock prices upward or downward. These
emotions are never spent, never exhausted. As timeless as the markets they rule,
they reign supreme, fueled by their own energy.
Want to see them in action? You can watch them command stock prices any
time during the trading day. For example, on a volatile morning, check the price of
a liquid (high-vol~e) stock from one hour to the next. Let's say we're watching
Peoplesoft (PSFT), the software giant. When the market opens, the stock is priced
at 38. By mid-day, the price has risen to 42.
Now, did Peoplesoft's fundamentals (i.e. quarterly earnings, products, or
sales volume) change significantly during that time period? Probably not. Greed
pushed the price up. Greed and the resulting demand created by buyers who
decided to "pay up" for the stock. When the price falls-and it will at some
point-fear will be the culprit. Much of the time, these two emotions rule
according to perception, not logic.
What's this .got to do with you? Everyt~ing!
Are you greedy? Sure! Are you fearful? I'd bet my new duck slippers on it.
"Yeah?" you reply, crossing your arms over your chest and squinting at me
through narrowed eyes. "What about you? Are you ever greedy or scared?"
Absolutely. Although experience (and hard knocks) has tempered these two
emotions in me, there was a time very early in my trading career when I'd happily
gorge my account with high-flying stocks. If (when) they tanked, I'd get scared
spitless and sell out as fast as I could, usually at big losses. Was I a horrible person?
No. I was human. And so are you.
When you fITst venture into the stock market, unless you are different from
everyone else in the world, greed and fear will be your constant companions.
They're part of human nature. Trouble is, in large doses they color your perception
of the market and urge you to make choices you wouldn't make in more rational
moments. Some of those choices may be harmful to your wealth.
Greed causes us to chase stocks, or in other words to buy into the euphoria of
the moment by agreeing to pay higher and higher prices for a rocketing stock. By
the time our order is filled, the buying frenzy has nearly dissipated. The stock usually staggers south, taking our money with it.
. When everyone around us screams that a stock is going to the moon, greed
urges us to "load the truck"! As our good sense dissolves, we max out our accounts
with this dream baby that will surely send our kids to college and us on a luxury
vacation. Not. The dream shrinks faster than we can yell, "Sell!" and our wouldbe profits shrivel with our bottom line. Rats. Double rats.
Greed convinces us to hold oversized positions in rocky markets. It spurs us
to grab IPOs (initial public offerings) on the first day they trade. It drives us to
gobble up market laggards "because they're cheap."


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

11

Greed's ruling partner, fear, on the other hand, motivates us to action even
more quickly. The fear of losing money reigns uppermost in our minds. Fear
causes us to sell a winning position too quickly, and interestingly enough it also
causes us to hang on to a losing position too long. When the market slaps us hard,
fear stops us from capitalizing on the next good opportunity, because we're afraid
to "get burned" again.
How do you eliminate these unsavory feelings from your trading and
investing decisions? By learning how to replace them with positive ones. Read
this book and others on the subject. Learn how to read market actions and reactions. Move slowly, study hard, and apply what you've learned in a disciplined,
cool-headed fashion. If you can accomplish that, you'll have the edge over 99 percent of all market players!
SUPPLY AND DEMAND

Fear and greed act as trailblazers for those age-old economic factors of supply and
demand. Many market advisors talk about fear/greed and supply/demand as if
they are separate entities. They are not. They are intertwined and perpetuate one
another into action.
So, now that you understand how greed and fear operate, let's focus on
supply and demand. These two factors move world markets-from rocket ships to
jelly beans-around the clock!
The concept is simple: We want what we can't have.
Pretend it's your birthday, and you're so-ooo excited. Over the last six
months you've been saving your money for the biggest, most expensive present
you've ever given to yourself. Heck, you've worked hard. You deserve it.
Now, you're on the way to the showroom floor to plunk down your money
on the sleekest, fanciest sports car ever to spin off of an assembly line. Your heart
starts to race. An afternoon spent on the telephone and researching the Int~met
affirmed this was the only one in the area. It's the perfect color-a deep, brilliant
red-with buttery, camel-colored leather seats. In a previou~ test drive, it purred
down the highway as if it had found its home.
Once you reach the dealership, you park and start walking toward the showroom. What if it's not there? What if someone else feels the same way you do?
No, it couldn't be. That glorious hunk of precision has got your name on it.
You enter the showroom and the car fills your vision. Sparkling in the lights,
feverish in brilliant red, it seems to whisper your name. You move toward the car
as nonchalantly as your shaking legs will let you. You reach out and touch its cool,
gleaming metal. Yessss!!!!! This baby is yours. It was created for you. Only you.
You lift the door handle, then slip into the driver's side. Sinking into the seat,
you breathe in the scent of polished leather. The satin-like wooden steering wheel


12

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

nestles into the palm of your left hand. Your right foot touches the silent gas pedal,
a perfect fit. Your fingers wrap around the gearshift knob, ready to take control of
the gutsiest hu~ of machinery this side of heaven.
"Here again?" The salesman's voice jolts you out of your reverie.
You take a deep breath and find your voice. "What's the best bottom line you
can give me on this baby?"
"The bottom line is gone." The salesman smirks. "I just sold\ it."
"What? No!" You jerk yo~r body out of the seat and jam your feet onto the
.cold, hard floor. Your stomach flips upside down. "You couldn't have."
"Sorry, buddy. This sweet little baby is going home with its new papa."
"Wait. Hold it." You put your hand on the salesman's arm, as he slaps a
"Sold" sticker under the windshield wiper. "I'll pay you more for it. More than the
other guy. A LOT MORE."
The salesman lifts your hand off his arm. His eyes glitter behind his glasses.
"No can do. Got me a signed contract. A deal's a deal."
Frantically, you clutch your checkbook. "When is the next one coming in?"
The salesman sighs and rolls his eyes. "We're not getting anymore in. Rumor
is, it's being discontinued."
"Discontinued?" Your pulse pounds in your head.
"Hey," he leers. "This isn't the only car in the showroom. Couldn't I interest
you in another model? Why, I've got a sweet-"
"No. No, thank you." With your heart crushing your chest, you tum and
trudge out of the showroom.
. A few days later, you're driving through the other side of town. Suddenly, you
spot a large automobile dealer and your gaze travels down the line of cars at the
front of the lot. You blink in disbelief. Are you seeing things? An entire line of the
car you wanted, sitting idle in the sunlight with flags waving on their antennas. You
slow and park.
Before you can get out of your car,a salesman approaches. "Wanna take
one of these babies home? Just park it in your driveway and watch your neighbors drool."
You stand and squint at the lot, shading your eyes from the sun. "How many
of that particular model do you have? I heard it was discontinued."
"Discontinued?" He chuckles. "Not this creampuff. I've got a dozen on the front
lot and more out back. That's why I can give you such a terrific deal on one of them."
You eye him warily. "How much?"
He spews out the same sticker price displayed by the other dealer.
You shrug, waving him off. "You gotta do better than that. I'll check back
with you later."


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

13

As you drive away, you think that guy must be nuts if he thinks I'm paying
sticker price, when he's got a lot crammed with the same model. I love that car;
but I'm not going to get suckered!
Get the picture?
When only a limited amount of a quality item exists at a certain priceremember the Harley-Davidson craze-we are willing to pay retail prices, and
sometimes higher, to own it (demand). But if a huge quantity (supply) of that same
item floods the market, the owner typically has to lower his price to sell it.
Prices in the commodities markets reflect supply and demand in a big way.
If severe winter weather causes the orange trees in Florida to freeze, the reduced
orange crop caus~s the cost of orange juice to rise in the grocery stores (demand).
Likewise, say you're monitoring your target stock, Bossy Banks, Inc., and it
soars to a new fifty-two-week high of 50. You quickly buy 200 shares at that price.
The next day, Bossy tanks and heads for the low 40s. "That stupid stock," you
mutter, watching in dismay. "If it ever gets back to 50, I'm going to sell and get
out even!"
During the following week, Bossy sinks to 35. After moving sideways in the
mid-30s for a few days, Bossy perks up and climbs to 40 (demand-buyers are
willing to pay a higher price). Within another two weeks, fueled by more demand,
the stock struggles back to 50.
You breathe a sigh of relief, then shoot your "limit sell" order to the market:
Sell 200 Bossy at 50. Bossy falls to 48.75. Huh? There were too many shares
(supply) to be absorbed at 50 by too few buyers. Your order is left hanging. You
cancel and lower your price to 48.75. Too late. The stock sinks to 48.65.
Frantically, you cancel your order again, and throw in a market order (sell at
current inside bid). A moment later, your order is filled at 48.50. By the way, this
is called "chasing a stock down."
Here's where fear and greed, the motivating factors, come in. When you
originally purchased Bossy Banks at 50 and it immediately sold off, the fear
shown by other buyers that they would pay no more than $50 per share drove
the price down. That created supply. The continued supply drove the price
down even lower, down to the mid-30s. When supply dried up as new buyers
came in, the stock moved sideways (indecision). As buyers committed to
higher prices (demand created by greed) at each level, the price rose higher.
When it reached the previous high of 50, fear of getting burned again caused
you to throw in your sell order. Others felt the same way, and together you
flooded the market with supply, once again forcing the stock down. Lowered
prices, sustained by fear, pushed the stock back down to 48.50. Eventually, greed
steps back in and creates demand and the cycle repeats itself.


14

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

So, remember, greed and fear act as the immediate trailblazers for demand
and supply. Later, we're going to add support and resistance to the equation.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Now that we've covered the basics on the markets, here's a quick review:
1. The securities markets in the United States began with speculative
trading in the debts of the new colonies and government. When the first
Congress met in New York's Federal Hall in 1789, it issued about $80
million in government notes, creating a market in securities.
2. Congress established the U.S. regulatory commission, the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), in 1934.
3. The NYSE lists more than 3,000 companies; their equities are referred to
as "listed stocks" and most have large market capitalizations.
4. "Market cap" equals number of shares outstanding (shares available to
the public not held by corporate insiders) multiplied by the price of a
single share of stock.
5 On the NYSE, shares are traded via a centralized auction system. Each
stock has a "specialist," who facilitates the trades and is charged with
conducting "a fair and orderly market" in that stock.
6. The price difference between the best (lowest) price you can purchase the
stock for, and the best (highest) price you will receive if you sell it, is
called the "spread."
7. The Nasdaq National Market lists nearly 5,000 companies with a combined market capitalization of nearly $6 trillion. Although Nasdaq companies cover the entire spectrum of the U.S. economy, its staples are
technology stocks.
8. Shares on the Nasdaq trade hands via broker/dealers represented by
market makers who act as middlemen. Many market makers may participate in a stock at one time. Traders and institutions can also place orders
with electronic communications networks (ECNs).
9. "Bulls" make money from the rising stock prices. "Bears" profit from
falling stock prices.
10. Greed and fear rule the financial markets. They are the precursors to
demand and supply.
11. Limited quantities of a high-quality item create demand. Sellers can raise
their prices as long as greed goads buyers to continue to "pay up."
12. When large quantities of an item flood the market, this creates supply. As
fearful buyers flee, sellers must lower their prices to unload the product.


WALL STREET: THE GREATEST GAME ON EARTH

15

•••
WHAT IS "CENTER POINT"?

Many of us who live and breathe the financial markets tend to get caught up in the
dizzying pace of this ever-changing arena. Inadvertently, we forget that we are
"whole people" who need balance in our lives to thrive. This linear world of numbers, charts, and technical rhetoric swallows us, and we're too busy calculating to
look up and take notice.
If the ,market moves fast, it also moves roughly. Fortunes are won and lost in
a heartbeat and only the fittest survive.
When I was new to this field, I spent many a day feeling battered and beaten.
I often wondered if I would ever escape in one piece, mentally and monetarily.
Only my stubborn resolve to emerge victorious, coupled with my strong belief
system, kept me in the game.
In my previous book, A Beginner's Guide to Day Trading Online, I shared
balancing reinforcement concepts at the completion of each chapter in a one-page
discussion called "Center Point." The positive feedback I received on these Center
Points encouraged me to continue them in this book.
Through the years, these concepts have encouraged me to keep reaching for
my dreams, both financial and non-financial.
May they also inspire you as you move forward on the pathway to success!

•••


16

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

•••
CENTER POINT

Come to the edge, he said. They said: We are afraid. Come to the edge, he said.
They came. He pushed them . .. and they flew.
-GUILLAUME APOLLINAIRE

You ••• A Golden Buddha

It was 1957 in Thailand. In the process of relocating a Buddhist monastery, a group
of monks were appointed to move the giant clay Buddha that resided within. The
monks started to push the huge statue, but soon noticed a crack down one side.
They decided to wait until the next day to continue with the job. By then, maybe
they could figure how to move the precious cargo without damaging it.
That night, however, a curious monk returned to examine the clay Buddha.
He shined a light close to the crack. To his astonishment, he saw· something glitter!
Quickly, the monk grabbed a hammer and chisel and chipped away at the
clay. Hours later, he finished his chipping and stood back in awe. He could hardly
believe his eyes. Standing before him was a huge, solid gold Buddha!
It was later discovered that several centuries before, while the Burmese army
was advancing on the area, Thai monks had concealed the Buddha in clay to keep
it from being stolen. During the attack, however, all the monks were killed, so the
. true nature of the treasure lay in secret until 1957.
You and I resemble the golden Buddha. We often conceal our true brilliance
with protective clay shells. We use social masks, boisterous masks, impatient
masks, tough masks, insensitive masks, even masks of false humor and enthusiasm, to hide who we really are. Disguising our feelings of inadequacy, these
masks also shield us from the outside world-a world we may perceive as overwhelming, uncomfortable, or simply tiresome.
Once we become aware of these masks, we can chip away at the clay and toss
the pieces behind us. Only then can we reveal who we really are: shining, loving,
successful beings on the road to fulfilling our dreams and visions!

•••


CHAPTER

2

Off to a Running Start:
Setting Up Your Business

A man must believe in himself and his judgment
to make a living at this game.

if he expects

-JESSE LIVERMORE

Short-term trading is a business like any other. You'll want to formulate a plan and set goals so that you have a clear-cut sense of
direction.
First, you need to establish how much time and money you
can realistically dedicate to your trading business. Then, you can choose
your equipment or update existing equipment. Finally, you'll decide what kind of
order-entry system 'best suits you and open an account with a broker.

MAP YOUR BUSINESS PLAN

When you set out to drive somewhere you've never been before, you check out a
map and ask for directions from someone who's been there before. Otherwise,
odds are .you'll get lost and have a much longer trip than you anticipated-if you
get there at all.
Your journey into the financial markets as a trader is much the same. Unless
you've traveled this road before, you'll succeed far more quickly and easily if you
have a map or plan.
The optimal plan is a written one. It's a fact: People who write down their
plans on paper usually achieve their goals. Peopl~ who merely hold their plans in
mind as vague generalities achieve a lot less. If you'd like to meet your objectives
more quickly, consider jotting down your trading business plan as we outline the
basic concepts ,in the next few pages.

17


18

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

WHAT'S YOUR TIME COMMITMENT?

First, do you intend to be a full-time or part-time player? If you intend to tackle
the market full-time, you may have a large portfolio. Possibly you've been trading
part-time and want to become fully involve~. Or, maybe you want to study hard
and ,fast. You realize that by watchipg market action as much as possible, ,you'll
absorb the most knowledge at the fastest possible rate. You got that right!
A benefit of swing and position trading, holding positions from two to five
days, or four to six weeks, is that.the longer-term time frames (as opposed to day
trading) lend themselves to part-time participation. Most part-time traders fall into
one of three categories:

1. Closet traders. These are, for example, dentists, physicians, attorneys,
office managers, and assistants who keep an eye on their stock positions
between drilling teeth, removing appendixes, taking phone calls, and
attending meetings.
2. First-and-last-hour traders. They pinpoint the stock that they want to
enter the night before, then depending on market conditions at the open
the next morning, they make their move. Before the market closes, they
check out their positions again for exit/entry decisions.
3. Laid-back traders. They enter one or two positions a week, max. Once
in, they set automatic stop-loss orders with their brokers. They keep an
ear to overall market action, and every few days peruse their portfolio for
possible profit-taking opportunities.
Do you see yourself in any of the previous examples? All of the options are valid
and have high potential for success. Please remember that in the beginning, though,
whether you commit to being a full-time or part-time trader, you'll need to allocate
extra time for study and research, over and above time set aside for actual trading.
And while we're on the subject, keep in mind that you'll never know everything there is to know about this business. If you're still trading years from now,
you'll still be studying years from now.
YOUR MOST IMPORTANT COMMITMENT: MONEY

Next, let's look at the capital you've earmarked for your trading account. First, size
does count. You're better off knowing the truth up front: that you must start with a
large enough amount of money to get you through the learning curve.
Unfortunately, an account funded with a few hundred dollars won't make the cut.
You'll also find that some online and all direct-access brokers require minimum
amounts for opening accounts.


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING

Up

YOUR BUSINESS

19

Next, the money you're targeting is now labeled "high risk." This capital has
to be money you can afford to lose. This point is not negotiable-for many reasons.
When you enter the stock market as a newcomer and make your initial trades,
you're going to make mistakes. Result? You're going to lose money. Count on it.
If you follow the money-management techniques you learn in this book,
you'll minimize your losses. Still, initially you will incur losses. So, please don't
use money intended for your children's college education or the down payment on
a new house. Simply put, don't fund your trading account with money that, if lost,
will alter your lifestyle in any way!
If you trade with money that isn't disposable, it will be "scared money."
Trading with scared money colors your perception of the market. Your common
sense flees under these conditions. Greed and fear mushroom out of control.
Controlled losses are no longer a cost of doing business-they balloon into catastrophes. At the least, your fear of Ipsing money will stop you from entering
proper setups that have a great chance of profitability.
Finally, if you've thought of borrowing the money to fund your trading
account, please don't. That's considered instant "scared money." Instead, sock
away a percentage of your income over time until you have enough to start with.
The flip side of all of these cautionary notes: If you have a clear mind because
you're trading with money you've set aside for just this purpose, you will approach
the market with a calm and confident mindset that is conducive to reaping profits!

QUICK ASSET ALLOCATION PLAN

For those who have large portfolios, consider this method of asset allocation:
Subtract your age from 100. If you're fifty-one, that leaves forty-nine. Fifty-one
percent of your portfolio should be in safe investments, such as bonds, annuities,
and money market funds. Forty-nine percent may be invested in higher-risk instruments, such as large-cap stocks. Finally, allocate 5 percent of the 49 percent for
your trading account.

SELECTING/UPDATING YOUR OFFICE EQUIPMENT

One of the great perks of trading is that setting it ,up requires far fewer expenditures than for a traditional start-up business.
Identify your office space first-whether it's a grand, mahogany-paneled
suite, a comer in a spare bedroom, or somewhere in between. Of mega-importance,
no matter where you set up to trade, is that your environment supports your ability
to focus. Mak~ sure you have a quiet, private place from which you can study,
research, and place your trades.


20

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Got zero equipment with which to start? For starters, beg, borrow, or buy a
no-frills television. Tune it to CNBC. Got that done!
Next, you'll need an up-to-date personal computer with a good monitor-the
bigger the monitor screen, the better. Get at least a seventeen-inch screen and
upgrade to a larger model as soon as you can. The more generous the screen, the
more grateful your eyes. Trust me. Analyzing charts on a laptop-sized screen for
any length of time stresses your vision.
If you trade more than occasionally, you will want to add extra monitors to
your PC so you can keep research and extra charting capabilities at an arm's length.
In terms of money, plan to spend in the ballpark of $2,000 to $4,000 for a PC,
large monitor(s), and software. You may also want to add a high-quality surge protector or two., Nothing spells "gut-grinder" like discovering a high-voltage storm
fried your PC internals, and your only connection to your broker is via telephone!
One of the most important components to your system is your Internet con- .
nection. The minimum connection you'll want to use is a 56K modem and an ISP
(Internet service provider), available for a monthly cost of roughly $15 to $30 a
month. The downside to opting for a regular ISP is a frequent inability to get
online during heavy traffic.
ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) lines are more expensive ($40 to
$100 a month) but faster, although frequent disconnections are also possible.
Even better, cable modems offer a reliable, higher-speed option at a reasonable price, $40 to $50 per month. The downside is that cable bandwidth is limited.
The more people who use the service, the slower it will operate. If you live in an
area where cable is new, chances are you will encounter lightning speed. As more
customers jump onboard, the speed may lag.
Depending -on your level of service, DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) can cost
from $40 to $190 per month. It offers good connection speed, but the spe~d relies
on your distance from the Telco vendor. DSL may not be available in all areas.
If you intend to trade more than occasionally, you'll want to think about
having a backup Internet connection, just in case your primary one goes down.
Why? Because the trading god has a perverse sense of humor. When Alan Analyst
decides to downgrade the entire biotech industry, we're usually maxed out in
biotech stocks. As we frantically push the "sell" button to escape with at least some
of our profits, our Internet connection will inevitably crash. Unless a backup connection is available allowing us to jump on the Net and sell, we can end up taking
nasty losses. Or, we end up morphing from a short-term trader into a disgruntled
long-term investor. So, consider backing up your Internet connection with a
second alternative (perhaps an inexpensive ISP). One saved trade, or in other
words rescued profits, will probably pay for the entire year's service.


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING UP YOUR BUSINESS

21

Aside from/your Internet connection, you'll encounter other monthly expenses.
When you start, you can use free charting services posted on the Internet (see
Chapter 4). As you progress, however, you'll want more sophisticated charts. When
you purchase a software-charting package, you'll need a data feed for quotes.
(Software-charting companies will provide data feed information to you.)
F~nally, budget for recurring expenses, like newspaper and magazine
subscriptions.

CHOOSING A BROKER

There are three basic ways to buy and sell stocks: through a full-service broker, an
online broker, or a direct-access broker.

The "Old-Fashioned" Way
The first method, now known as "old-fashioned," is to pick up the telephone·
and call your full-service broker. In this world of high-speed Internet connections,
it's the most inefficient and costly way, but if you're comfortable with your broker
and want to continue this way, by all means do so. Just be aware that you pay the
highest commission rate of all order-entry methods, and those commissions shave
a hefty chunk off of your profits.

Selecting an Onliue Broker'
The next method is to open an account with an online broker and place your
orders over the Internet. Find one that offers:
.. Access to real-time quotes, which means stock prices are current when displayed. For precise entry points, real-time quotes are a must. Some compa. nies still give "delayed" quotes, which are fifteen or twenty minutes old.
.. A Web site that is accessible and easy to navigate, with graphics that snap
on the screen rapidly; also, pages that appear quickly when you move from
screen to screen.
.. A well-organized order-entry screen built to guard against data entry errors.
For example, are the "buy" and "sell" buttons far enough away from each
other? I know lots of traders (I've done it) who, in a panic to sell a tanking
stock, have accidentally doubled up on it instead of selling the original
shares. That particular episode always adds excitement to the day!
.. A quick confirmation system, account balances, and portfolio updates.
... Alternative ways of reaching the broker. What happens when the market
plunges? Are orders accepted and filled, or does their system jam? If the Web
site crashes from heavy traffic, can a broker be reached by phone, and fast?


22

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

.. Low margin rates; you'll be surprised at how they differ.
•. A reasonable minimum dollar amount to open an account, if any.
-+- Automatic buy- or sell-stops. Make sure they will set them on Nasdaq
stocks. All brokers will set stops on NYSE stocks (that service originates at
the NYSE, the Nasdaq doesn't furnish it at this time). Most brokers will
offer this on Nasdaq issues as a customer service benefit. Ask if the buy- and
sell-stops are "day" orders or if they can be "good-till-canceled" (GTC).
GTC sell-stops are particularly useful if you want to keep a core holding in
your account while you go on vacation. (If the designated price hits your
sell-stop, it triggers a market order and the position is automatically sold.)
One great source of information about online brokers is Gomez Advisers
(www.gomez.com). The site reviews and rates online brokers according to variables such as ease of use and consumer confidence. 'Sometimes, it also offers cash
rebates if you sign up for a participating brokerage.
You can also peruse the National Association 'of Securities Dealers
(www.investor.nasd.com) if you want to find out if charges or complaints have
been charged against your broker in the Individual Investors Services' Public
Disclosure section.
Also check out GetSmart.com (www.getsmart.com). which shows you the
costs, benefits, and features of online brokers before you open an account with them.
Finally, ask other traders with online accounts what Internet brokers they use,
and whether the brokers are reliable and efficient. Take your time and do as much
research as possible.. Here is a selection of popular online brokers:
A.B. Watley
Ameritrade
Brown & Co.
CSFBdirect
Datek
E*Trade
Muriel Siebert
Quick & Reilly
Schwab
Suretrade
T.D.Waterhouse

www.abwatley.com
www.ameritrade.com
www.brownco.com
www.csfbdirect.com
www.datek.com
www.etrade.com
www.msiebert.com
www.quickway.com
www.schwab.com
www.suretrade.com
www.tdwaterhouse.com

(888) 229-2853
(800) 454-9272
(800) 822-2021
(800) 825-3723
(888) 463-2835
(800) 387-2331
(800) 872-0444
(800) 837-7220
(800) 435-4000
(800) 793-8050
(800) 934-4410

Some investors start with an Internet broker and later transfer to the directaccess trading method we'll talk about next.


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING

Up

YOUR BUSINESS

23

Opening an Account with a Direct-Access Broker
The third way of placing a buy/sell order is through a direct-access broker.
Before we venture into a quick overview of direct-access trading, let's define the
quote systems.
Three types of quote systems are used in trading:
1. Level I. Real-time quotes given to you by your broker. (We talkf?d about
these quotes in Chapter 1.) The quotes represent the best price for which
you can buy, or sell, at that moment.
2. Level II. Continually updated quotes displayed on a level-II screen.
Besides the best (inside) bid and ask (offer) quoted to you on level I, on
an actively traded stock there may be many more participants waiting in
line, hoping to buy or sell the same stock at an even lower or higher
price, respectively.
3. Level III. Quote systems used by specialists and market makers to
refresh their positions; they are generally unavailable to the public.
A direct-access order-entry system, using level-II screens, is the fastest way
to send your order to an exchange. While we swing-and-position traders aren't as
adamant about speed of execution as day traders are, it's a nice feeling to know
we're in control of our orders when they're placed.
.Level-II screens let us see "inside the markets" on the NYSE, Amex, and
Nasdaq, so it's oft~n said that a level-II screen gives a stock "transparency." When
you place your order, it bypasses all intermediaries and goes straight to the designated exchange.
A level-II quote screen for an active stock moyes and changes rapidly, as it
is constantly being updated. Most traders add a "time and sales" screen to their
level II. Time and sales displays the actual "prints," meaning the trades that are
taking place and the time that they were executed. We'll talk later about how to
use this screen, but in the meantime, Figures 2-1(a) and 2-1(b) displays level-IT
screens of General Electric (GE, a NYSE stock) and Sun Microsystems (SUNW,
a Nasdaq stock). The level-II screens are slightly different because they originate
from two different markets. We'll get into the variances later in the book. If you
intend to make short-term trading your full-time occupation, consider opening an
account with a broker who offers a level-II order-entry system. Because they cater
to traders', brokers who offer direct-access trading with level II usually include
comprehensive packages with customizable charts and watch lists with streaming
quotes, ticker tapes, and up-to-the-mipute news.


24

A

NYS 42.47
NAS 42.45
ClN 42.45
: CAES 42.45
;" MADF 42.45
;
aSE 42.42
~ ~RCHIP 42.41
I:
ARCA 42.41
:" ISLAND 42.40
CSE 42.37
PSE 42.37
TRIM 42.30

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

42.49
42.50
42.50

42.50
42.50
CAES
MADF
SSE
PSE
ISLAND
PHS
ISLAND

42.50
42.50
42.56
42.58
42.65
42.74
42.74
··············j··,·····..

r·····

Figu,e 2·1 (a).
Level-II screen of General Electric (GE).
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

The downside: You may have to place a minimum number of trades per
month, or else pay a fee.
Here is a partial list of direct-access software companies. Their Web sites list
participating brokers. More software comes onto the market regularly, so check
financial Web sites and magazines for new additions.
CyberTrader
RealTick
RediPlus
Tradeportal
Tradescape

www.cybercorp.com
www.realtick.com
www.onsitetrading.com
www.tradeportal.com
www.tradescape.com


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING UP YOUR BUSINESS

~:

:"
j:

~;

'irK' ·'h:.

INCA 17.49

ISlAND 17. ~9

ISlD 17.49

OLOE 17.49
: REOIBK 17.48
REDI 17.~8
PERT 17.48

HRZG
SCHB
! ISlAND
PlPR
RSSF
".

25

11.48
11.48
17.48
17.47
11.47

2
11
11
7

5
5
4

35
10
13
1
1

5

SCHB

LEHM

3

MONT

10

HRZG
INCA
6S\CHIP
NDBC

17.51
11.51
11.52
11.52

MAOF 17.52
REDIBK 17.52

BEST 11.52
ARCA 17.52
REOI 11.52

2

15
10
1
20
2

24
10
2

Figure 2·1 (b).
Level-II screen of Sun Microsystems (SUNW).
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

A few online brokers now.offer direct-access trading or a hybrid of level I
and level II systems, sometimes referred to as "level 1Y2." You'll see their ads in
trade magazines and newspapers.
Once you've selected a few direct-access sources, you may want to call the
companies and ask a customer service representative the following questions:
.. Do they require a minimum opening balance?
.. Is there a monthly charge for the system? Do you have to make a minimum number of trades per mon~? Does the number of executions you
make affect the monthly charge?
.. Is the system reliable? How often does it go .down? (If the company

rep~

resentative chokes before answering these questions, politely end the conversation and go on to the next company.)
.. Can the charting program access weekly charts? (This is important-some
trading software doesn't include weekly charts.)
.. Does it use candlestick charts? (You'll learn about candlesticks in Chapter 6.)
.. Does it include a full menu of indicators, such as moving averages, MACD,

Commodity Channel Index, Stochastics, Relative Strength Index, and


26

A

-+-

+..
..
-+-

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Fibonacci retracements? (You'll learn about these indicators/oscillators
later as well.) For now, just inquire about the system's charting capabilities.
Can you overlay one chart on top of another? This is useful when comparing a stock's price action to the S&P Index, for example.
What's their commission structure? Do charges differ depending on
whether it's a listed or Nasdaq stock?
What are the margin rates? Do they pay interest on c~edit balances?
Does the system offer alarms? If so, you can set them to sound off when
specified stocks hit a certain price.
Does the system offer news? What's the extra charge?

I encourage you to research at least three systems before you choose one. Ask
each company to send you infonnation, then note how fast they respond. Their attitude right out of the gate will tell you something. When you call them on the
phone, how fast do they answer? Does a canned voice ask you to leave a message?
Are their customer representatives friendly and knowledgeable?
Finally, talk to others who have direct-access systems. Even in this electronic
age, word of mouth can be the most reliable reference.

THE COMMISSION MAZE

Commissions are a necessary business expense since, by law, your trades have to
go through a registered broker. The rates vary from broker to broker.
To make sense of the maze of commissions, remember that the most important service a broker can give you is to fill your orders-quickly and accurately.
Generally speaking, the faster your order is filled, the better price you will receive.
The higher the commission you pay to online brokers, the more "bells and
whistles" you have access to, meaning charts, real-time quotes, fundamental
analysis, and news. One option is to pay high commission prices (assuming they
fill your orders rapidly and efficiently) and use their charts and research.
The bad news: Many brokers' charts aren't detailed enough; they don't have
the indicators and oscillators you need as a short-term trader for decision support.
The good news: Many fine charting software packages exist in the marketplace. As
I mentioned earlier, some reasonably good Web sites offer real-time charts and
updated news. If you don't mind wading through their advertisements, some give
you the information at no charge. So, an alternative is to open an account with a
plain vanilla broker and obtain your charts and news from another source.
Direct-access brokers also offer a range of commission structures. They are
usually more intricate than online brokers, so if you want to open an account with
one of these brokers, make sure to request a detailed list of charges.


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING UP YOUR BUSINESS

27

On balance, direct-access software usually provides high-quality, intra-day
charts and streaming news, so you don't have to go elsewhere for these tools.
Okay, are you out of breath yet?
Let's sort this stuff out:

... Option: If you intend to jump into short-term trading with both feet and
make it a big part of your life, consider opening your account with a
direct-access fmn that offers level II order-entry capabilities.
• ' Option: If you intend to wander into trading at a slower pace and trade on
a part-time basis, an account with an online broker should be sufficient.
+ Option: You may want to venture into the market with an online broker,
then transfer to a fancier direct-access system when you feel comfortable.
Know this: The least effective way to learn how to trade is to take on too much
at once, then crash and burn because of information overload. Develop your own
style that parallels your personality. Comfort is key to successful trading choices.

SLIPPAGE: WHAT IT MEANS

Slippage occurs when you put in your market order to buy or sell, and your order
gets filled at a different price than the quote at that moment-higher if you're
buying and lower if you're selling. A high degree of slippage can take place when
you throw a market order to buy a stock that's "running," or rocketing up in price.
Slippage also chews into your profits when you place a market order to buy
a "thinly traded" stock, which means a stock that trades on low volume (less than
300,000 to 500,000 shares per day). The market maker will see your lone order to
buy at the market floating in, and he or she will "adjust" the price a bit to suit his
or her needs. He or she will drool a little, then raise the price a fraction of a point,
and fill your order. (To date, this practice has become more prevalent on the
Nasdaq than the NYSE, but I've seen it happen on both exchanges.)
The cure for slippage is to issue limit orders (your order will be filled at a
specified price or not at all), or place your orders on a level-II screen through a
direct-access broker.
To excel in short-term trading, you must learn the challenges involved. After
all, the stakes are your hard-earned money. So, here's a re~lity lesson: The
moment you enter a position, or purchase a stock, you're already "in the hole."
Your broker's commission is added onto the price of the purchase. That could total
anywhere from $5 to $25 or more. If you add ten cents a share slippage, you're a
bit deeper in the hole. On 500 shares, that equals $50. So, if you paid a commission of $15 and add that to slippage of $50, you've already got a drawdown (paper


28

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

loss) of $65. In order to climb out and profit, the stock has to rise at least eleven
to twelve cents a share for you arrive at the even money point, and move even
higher for you to profit. When you exit the trade, you again pay commissions and
experience possible slippage.

MARGIN ACCOUNTS: HOW THEY WORK

When you open your account, your broker will ask if you want to designate it a
, standard "margin account." The standard margin is called a "50-percent margin
account." (Day trading accounts have different procedures.) That means whatever
amount in dollars you deposit into the account, your broker will match your
deposit with a loan of equal value. So, if you open an account with $50,000, your
broker will automatically loan you another $50,000. Suddenly, you have $100,000
at your fingertips! Isn't that sweet?
But, wait. It's not time to start shopping just yet. As with any bank, your
broker charges interest on the loan. The rate is usually low, and no interest is
charged unless you actually use the money.
There are two reasons to open a margin account. First, as you become more
experienced, the margin gives you extra buying power. Thus, you're "leveraging"
your money, or making more money (we hope) than the interest on the loan costs
you. Second, the only way you can sell stocks short is to open a margin account.
And believe me, in this volatile market, selling short can reap big profits.
If you're an old pro in the stock market, you may already have a margin
account. If you're new to this game, your best strategy is to open a margin account,
then immediately forget you have the extra buying power.
.
One of the riskiest things you can do as a new trader is max out your entire
account, margin and all. Please understand-when a stock you are holding on
margin falls, you lose twice as much money as you would if you were playing with
just your own cash. Gulp!'
As a safety measure, when you first begin trading, forget you have a margin
account and use only your original equity to trade with. Keep a portion of your
account in cash at all times. Sound boring? Don't worry. The market will provide
plenty of entertainment and excitement along the way!
YOU GOTTA HAVE GOALS

Okay, we've discussed your investment in your trading business, as it relates to
time and money. You're probably well on your way to furnishing your trading
space, and you may have your account paperwork in the mail.
Now for the fun part of the trip.


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING UP YOUR BUSINESS

29

Studies show that a delicious "carrot" (make mine chocolate!) dangling in
front of our nose urges us to work harder and smarter. Let's identify some carrots,
or goals, to use as signposts and an ultimate destination: success.

In the Short Term
First, let's define short-term goals. Time frame? Six months to a year.
This is the part where most rookie traders smack their lips, rub their palms
together, and declare, "I'm going to make $500 a day." Or, "I'm going to make
$2,000 a week." Even better, "I'm going to make 50 percent on my money this year."
Hold the ballgame! Maybe you will, maybe you won't. For the sake of your
trading career, please avoid promising yourself/your significant other/your
kids/the dog that you will bring home a certain amount of investing bacon per day,
week, or year.
While you're learning to become a successful market player, your goal is
to conserve your capital. Believe me, that in and of itself is a challenging goal
to achieve!
Once you gain some experience, then you can promise yourself and the dog
that you'll make more than 50 percent of your trades "green" (winners) in a certain time period. Trust me, it's far better to clear $10 on a trade, than it is to lose
$200. Lots of little profits add up to big profits.
After you've been trading for a year or longer, and you're consistently taking
profits out of the market, you may want to set monetary goals. Personally, I avoid
establishing daily dollar goals, such as $1,000 profit per day. Ado-or-die number
forces me to make questionable trades. Questionable trades equal lost money. So,
as they say in Georgia, "That dog won't hunt." I prefer weekly goals; it takes the
pressure off, and I usually attain these goals, or better.
Perhaps one of the finest profit-making goals you can establish early on in
your trading career is a principal I discussed in my previous book, A Beginner's
Guide to Day Trading Online. It is: "Trade to trade well, not to make money." If
you trade to trade well, by planning your trade and then following your plan precisely, the money will follow. When you keep a running total in your head of the
dollar amount made/lost at any given moment, it blurs your perception of market
reality. It may even urge you to ignore a potentially dangerous situation. So, make
it a goal to trade to trade well. Make it a forever-term goal. You'll be glad you did.

The Long Haul
Now, let's define long-term goals. Time frame? Two to ten years.
First, commit to the following goal that defines a professional trader: To consistently take profits out of the market. When you reach this goal, you can step


30

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

proudly into the "arena of success." What's your dream? A log cabin in the
Smokey Mountains? A luxury cruise to Alaska? Establishing a charity? Great!
Make sure to plant that seed right now. It will act as a terrific motivator, if (when)
the going gets tough.
Here's a way to help you attain that long-term goal more quickly. In The
Richest Man in Babylon, by George S. Clason, the protagonist, Arkad, reigns as
the wealthiest man in ancient Babylon. Arkad's fITst prosperity lesson to his followers is, "Start thy purse to fattening." Further explanation: "A part of all you earn
is yours to keep." Arkad insists that when his followers earn money, they immediately put away 10 percent of those earnings into safekeeping. 2
From now on, when you grab profits from the market, pay yourself first. Take
10 percent and sock it away in a low-risk account. It will grow over time, and
checking the balance will uplift your spirits on days the market uses you for a
punching bag.
Here are some more goal-setting guidelines:
.. Deep down inside, you must believe you are worthy of financial success.
+- Set realistic goals. Stretching to achieve a high goal is good. Setting yourself
up for failure by setting unrealistic goals is detrimental to your self-esteem.
.+ Break your goals down into small increments labeled with signposts. Once
the signpost is reached, reward yourself. A perfectly executed trade, for
example, deserves a treat-a new golf club, a day at the spa, or, if you·
really hit gold, a weekend away!

I

Remember, you must be able to imagine (see) yourself reaching your goal. If
you can't imagine ever attaining your goals as a successful short-term trader,
chances are you won't achieve them. If, however, you form a picture in your mind
of yourself as an adept and astute market participant, your actions will confmn
your picture,· and the picture will confirm your actions.

2Clason, George S. The Richest Man in Babylon, (NY: Signet, 1988).


OFF TO A RUNNING START: SETTING

Up

YOUR BUSINESS

31

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Okay, now let's review:
1. Trading is a business, like any other. Begin your business plan by writing
down the commitment you intend to make in time and money.
2. Make sure that your trading capital is money you can afford to lose.
3. Init~al components to budget for your trading area/office: quiet, well-lit
space; television, up-to-date PC, large-screen monitor(s); high-speed
Internet connection with optional backup connection; surge protectors;
and newspaper/magazine subscriptions.
4. To open your trading account, check out online brokers for these requirements: access to real-time quotes, a Web site that is accessible and easy
to navigate, a well-organized order-entry screen, a quick confirmation
system, account balances and portfolio updates, and reliable, alternative
ways of reaching them.
5. If you choose to use a direct-access broker, make sure that they provide
weekly charts as an option, candlesticks, and a full complement of indicators and oscillators. Ask for their commission schedule in writing, as
some direct-access brokers have complicated commission systems. .
6. Slippage occurs when you put in a buy/sell market order, and get filled
at a different price than the quote at that moment (higher if you're
buying, and lower if you're selling).
7. The standard margin is called a "50-percent margin account," which
means your broker matches your deposit with a loan of equal value.
8. Short-term goals to consider: (1) To conserve your capital, (2) To make
a certain percentage ofyour trades "green," (3) Trade to trade well.
9. Long-term goals to consider: (1) To consistently take profits out of the
markets, (2) To attain the "big picture goal" you've always wanted!
10. Follow the advice of Arkad, "The Richest Man in Babylon": Pay yourself first by taking 10 percent of your market winnings and putting them
into a separate, low-risk account.


32

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

•••
CENTER POINT

If one advances confidently in the direction of his own dreams,

and endeavors to
live the life which he has imagined, he will meet with a success unexpected in
common hours.
-HENRY DAVID THOREAU

Commit: Transform Your Dreams into Goals

Nothing jump-starts us on our roadway to success fas~er than making a solid commitment to our goals. When we commit ourselves to a desired result, we program
ourselves to "lock on," much the same way a missile is programmed to lock onto a
target. Then, magically it seems, we proceed on "automatic pilot." Our brain gives
us the appropriate actions to pursue the target, no matter how it tries to elude us!
Without a firm commitment to a goal, our autopilot remains in the "off" position; no basis exists for programming or locking onto a target. Perhaps only a hazy
idea meanders in and out of our consciousness. Vague ideas and dreams beget
vague results.
The act of commitment, however, empowers us to reach into our potential
treasure "bag" and bring unused talents into our present-day experience.
We may also discover we can cancel previous limiting beliefs we had about
our supposed lack of talent or ability. Have you ever declared a hundred times that
you're not adept at a certain task, only to find that when pressured into it, you perform at a high level of competency?
The act of commitment programs us to attract new opportunities. When we
make a frrm commitment, things start happening. Suddenly, when we know and
declare (yes, writing it down is important!) that we will achieve a certain outcome
and adopt it as our truth, all sorts of opportunities start appearing in our lives.
Each time we make a new, positive commitment, we choose to begin a new
life experience. Suddenly, what we imagined to be a dream becomes tangible, and
transforms into an exciting new reality!

•••


CHAPTER

3

Master a
Money-Making Mindset

There is only one side to the stock market; ... not the bull side
or the bear side, but the right side. It took me longer to get that
general principlefixedfirmly in my mind than it did most ofthe
more technical phases of the game of.stock speculation.
-JESSE LIVERMORE

The stock market is a timeless macrocosm of energy that expands
and contracts as it propels itself through time and space.
As Mark Douglas comments in The Disciplined Trader, "The markets are always in motion; they never stop, only pause.,,3 Whether they are officially open or closed, they remain stadiums for continuous barter as perceptions
of value change.
Imagine this: You purchase shares of equity in a listed company that supplies
computer virus scans. On the evening news, the announcer reports that viruses that
invade personal computers are on the rise. By the time the New York Stock
Exchange rings the opening bell the next morning, your stock price has soared.
Did the company fundamentals change in the last twelve hours? Did earnings, the
product, or the debt ratio change overnight? No. The perception of future supply
and demand, and thus the value, has changed.
Just as the perception of value fluctuates in human minds twenty-four hours
a day, actual marketplaces trade around the clock. Every moment of the day,
someone, somewhere, is trading money for interest in companies, financial instruments, agricultural commodities, and more.
As the sun rises and falls on each hemisphere, the events and resulting sentiment in each market affect other markets globally, in a domino effect. In his

3Douglas. Mark. The Disciplined Trader. p. 41 (NY: New York Institute of Finance. 1990).

33


34

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

book, Intermarket Technical Analysis, John Murphy says, "One of the most
striking lessons ... is that all markets are interrelated-financial and nonfinancial,
domestic and intemational.,,4 While we sleep, events, news, even weather, and the
resulting human reactions to those circumstances, determine how our markets
open the .next morning.

THE MARKET AS AN UNSTRUCTURED ENTITY

Because the market is timeless, it remains unstructured to a large degree. Therein
lies the challenge!
We humans like structure. We like to take a certain action with the assurance
that it will produce a certain result. We understand limits, borders, and finite circumstances built on foundations of order.
As most of us find out the hard way, the market doesn't work on that principle. And, because added volatility creates wider, more erratic moves based on
emotion rather than logic, the market "changes its mind" constantly. Constant
change brings on a cornucopia of possibilities-some rational, some that boggle
our sense of logic.
How can we-humans who thrive on structure, order, and boundaries-survive in a mercurial market? By creating our own limits. Each time we enter the
market, we must carry our own structure-meaning our own definitions, principles, and criteria-along with us.
First, assimilate all the knowledge you can that pertains to this playing field.
Next, study your own psychological reactions to the situations trading offers to
you. Finally, armed with knowledge of how the market performs-and even more
important, how you perform when presented with opportunities and challengesyou can draw up a set of guidelines that define your criteria for entering a trade.
These criteria define your structure, your limits, and your boundaries. Next, superimpose these onto the market.
Now you are in command of your actions. You are not reactive, you are proactive. You cherry-pick your trades, entering only those with the highest probability
of reward and the lowest amount of risk. You plan your trade, and trade your plan.
You assume complete responsibility and accountability for your actions. Best of
all, your strict approach to the market speeds you to small losses and big profits.
And that's what it's all about, isn't it?

4 MurphYI John J. Intermarket Technical Analysis, p. 1 (NY: John Wiley & SonsI Inc., 1991).


MASTER A MONEY-MAKING MINDSET

35

THE STOCK MARKET IS ALWAYS RIGHT

Surely you've heard the old adage, "the stock market is always right." How true it is!
It has no inherent sense of right or wrong. Did your core holding come out with
good earnings? The market sneers and slaps it down. Did Fed Chairman Alan
Greenspan smile benignly during a televised speech? The market puffs up in ecstasy.
Are growth stocks overvalued and their PIE (price-to-earnings ratio) blown
out of proportion? The market doesn't care. That's the way it is. Like it or leave it.
I once met a CEO from a very large organization who had just retired. He
decided to fill his spare time by actively trading in the stock market. This gentleman
epitomized success. Handsome and fit, he had a square jaw, silver hair, and drove
the biggest Mercedes money could buy. And talk about a ''Type A" personality!
Everywhere he walked, even on an errand so trivial as lunch or the post office, he
led with his chin as though he were going into battle. He spoke rapidly and allowed
no time for idle comments. He was a general of people, through and through.
He powered into the stockmarket, just as he'd powered through everything
else in life, sure of his success. Wincing, I watched the market slap him. He licked
his wounds and went back for more. The market rolled her eyes, shook her head,
and popped him in the chin. He fell, but eventually struggled to his feet and
insisted on taking another swing. Pow!
The day came when I couldn't watch any longer. Over lunch, I said, "You're
losing money, aren't you?"
He nodded. "I don't understand it. My stocks never act like I think they
should. I study analysis and charts. Lord knows, I read books and attend lectures
on finance. What more can I do?"
"It's your mindset," I said gently. "You're used to being in charge. You come
from a world where you're always obeyed. You've muscled through projects and
deals, and if things don't go your way, you use your intellect and power to change
them to your favor." I looked directly into his eyes. "You can't do that in the stock
market. It won't obey you or anyone else." He flinched at the realization, but he
knew it was true.
During the weeks that followed, he tried to alter his mindset, but his attitude
was too deeply entrenched. Once he entered a position, he zeroe~ in on what should
happen, on what he wanted to happen, instead of what was. (Get the difference?)
He finally decided to take up another endeavor to fill his retirement years.
People who enjoy a position of power in their own communities, organizations, or families often arrive at the market with the expectations of being obeyed.
When they buy a stock, they expect it to rise. If it doesn't, frustration sets in.
Know this: The market is bigger than all of us. Few have the power to move
it in any direction for any length of time. What we wish, or want to happen, makes


36

A

B~GINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

no difference. Woe to the player who remains stuck in his or her own opinion of
"the way things oughtta be."
We deal with it by adapting ourselves to market movements, and by staying
nimble and open-minded. We know that just because we believe the market should
go up or down, doesn't make it so!
Now, how do we address the previous section that talked about applying our
criteria so we're in command to a market that's always right? Like this: When we
come to the market to trade, we observe it without emotion, with no thought of
what should be. Once we identify the apparent trend, we choose stocks with eligible setups and apply our risk/reward criteria to them. If they fit our predetermined plan, we enter the play. If they don't, we stand on the sidelines until a better
opportunity comes along.

MEET YOUR EMOTIONS-UP CLOSE AND PERSONAL

By now you've guessed· what the biggest obstacle is on your pathway to taking
consistent profits out of the financial arenas. You guessed it, your emotions.
As Pogo said, "We have met the enemy, and the enemy is us."
When you're new to trading, you'll probably encounter an emotional roller
coaster. For example, you buy a stock that you believe will rise endlessly. Instead,
it reverses sharply, swallowing not only your gains, but also a chunk of your capital. Your happiness succumbs to hope. Your hope dissolves into resentment.
The next day you enter another position. It immediately tumbles precariously close to your stop-loss point. Holding your breath and mumbling, "Not
again," you watch with dread and apprehension. Suddenly, the stock bounces
and soars to new highs, delivering a fat, unexpected bounty. Fear and dread convert to joy and satisfaction. You exhale, then declare staunchly that you knew it
all along!
Trouble is, riding that emotional roller coaster can get us into trouble. It also
induces stress and exhaustion. At extreme levels, it causes psychological damage.
Professional traders who have been successful in this business for a long time
avoid these emotional swings. They've learned how to control their reactions to
unexpected market gyrations. And so can you.
That's why I'm addressing the subject of market psychology early on. Just as
analysts ','pound the table" on stocks they believe will outperform the market, I'm
going to "pound the table" on this point. You can read every book and attend every
class, hook up a wall full of monitors, and fund your account with a zillion dollars,
but I promise you this: If you don't learn to master your emotions, your account
will quickly slide into meltdown.


MASTER A MONEy-MAKING MINDSET

37

THE WINNING MINDSET-TRAIN YOUR BRAIN

We humans instinctively build mental defenses that shield us from the pain of
unfulfilled expectations. Our unfulfilled expectations may cause us to create false
pi~tures that distort our vision, and our ability to see our true environment. So,
emotional turmoil colors our perception of reality. And, as any psychologist will
confirm, emotions are far stronger than logic.
How do we rise above these detrimental feelings? First, we identify which
ones "belong" to us. (You can't eliminate something from your life, unless you
first acknowledge that you "own" it.) Then, we replace those unwanted emotions
with positive responses. At that moment, success is ours.
As mentioned before, most emotions related to the stock market stem from
fear and greed. The two are more closely connected than one would imagine. And
guess what the bridge is? Excitement!
If we drag fear out into the sunlight, we'll find out exactly what it is. I once
heard a minister say, "Fear is nothing, trying to be something."
"Sure," you reply, rolling your eyes. ''Tell me that when I watch my brand-new
position crash. My palms get sweaty, my heart pounds in my ears, and my stomach
chums. You call that nothing?"
No. I call that fear. And fear is afeeling. Not only is it an unpleasant feeling,
it causes blood vessels to constrict, which reduces the oxygen supply to our
brains, thus limiting our ability to make rational decisions. And this at a time when
we need to make rational decisions the most!
On the other hand, you can't declare, "I'm not scared," and expect fear to disappear. Nature allows no vacuums. You have to feel something.
In the previous situation, you bought shares of stock that your research indicated would rise in value. The market, however, had different ideas. It took your
stock and hammered it lower. Fear and panic took over when you checked the
price. Maybe you went into denial, maybe you rationalized, surely you justified.
Still, while your mind raced with thoughts in a frantic attempt to change your pain
to pleasure, agony washed over you. You took one of two actions: You held onto
the position, refusing to take the loss; or you sold, then chastised yourself for
being dumb enough to buy it in the first place.
Guess what? The previous situations, and variations on it, can take place.
Instead of it controlling you, however, you'll be in command. With practice and
experience, you'll displace fear and all of its variations (from mild anxiety to
head-pounding panic) with a calm confidence spawned by a concise plan that's
been filtered through discipline and knowledge.
The fear of being wrong or the need to be right has surely lost more money
for more people than all of the other attitudes combined!


38

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Imagine this scene: You make every correct move; you research and plan your
trade, then buy at the perfect entry point. The following day, the market goes
against you. Your stock plummets and hits your mental stop-loss point. Gulp!
Thoughts race through your mind. Should you sell now? Will the stock immediately rebound if you do? Will your loss be for nothing? If you hold on a little
longer, will it tum into a win? Will you have to admit to others you were wrong?
Feeling: Anxiety, disappointment, guilt. Action: You ignore your stop-loss point
and tum your back on the falling stock.
Unfortunately, Americans and most of "civilized" society are brought up
with the dictum that we must always be "right." Strong, smart people are "right."
Those who are "wrong," we label ignorant and empty-headed. Consequently,
most of us will do anything to avoid being wrong. In the stock market, that attitude can be deadly.
Here's the cure for the fear of being wrong/the need to be right. First, banish
"right" and "wrong" from your market mentality. From now on, there are no such
entities. There are only choices. You make a choice based on the best information
available to you, with your plan at your side.
Remember, no one on this earth knows which way the stock market, or your
chosen stock, will move during the next ten minutes, ten days,. or ten months. So,
you make the most astute choice possible and manage the trade according to plan. If
your position moves up, you take profits at your preconceived exitpoint. If the position surrenders to selling pressure and touches your stop-loss, think, "Hmm ... this
didn't go the way I thought it would. I'll take my loss here and look for another
opportunity." That thought triggers the satisfaction of protecting your capital, which
in turn causes you to pull the "sell" trigger. No fear, no anxiety, no trepidation,
headaches, or stomach twisting. Ahhh. Feels good, doesn't it?
Variations on fear's buddy, greed, are more fun to consider. Unfortunately
though, they can cause just as much pain. For example, have you ever chased a
stock? I have! If you've been active in the market, you probably have too.
Say the market just opened. A stock on your watch list jumps out of the gate
and starts screaming skyward. You think, "Wow! This stock is really flying.
Everybody else is paying up for it, so I will too. What's a couple of points in a
stock this strong? Betcha it's going to the moon!"
Trouble is, in this scenario, you may end up buying high and selling low.
Since the market is controlling you, this is the result more often than not.
Displace that thought pattern with the following: "This stock passed my
entry poi~t. Ah, well, I'll catch it the next time. Another opportunity will present
itself shortly."
Bear in mind that at this moment, there are more than 9,000 stocks you can
choose from. Why be a sheep that might end up shorn?


MASTER A MONEY-MAKING MINDSET

39

By the way, if you languish every time you leave money on the table-get
over it. Just as you're going to take small losses, you're also going to watch stocks
rocket to the moon the day after you sell your position. Don't drive yourself
bonkers by adding up the profits you could have made. Learn to shrug off missed
money. It's part of the business.
Another greed-motivated behavior is to "bet the ranch," especially on a hot
tip. Say a cocky taxi driver told you furtively that Cranky Computers was going
to be acquired tomorrow morning early by Huge Conglomerate, Inc. Out of the
side of his mouth, he says, "The stock price is gonna scream!"
You run home and conduct some quick research. Surprisingly enough,
Cranky has good fundamentals and decent charts. Instead of buying a tiny lot size
for fun, you max out your account, margin and all. Yessiree, Cranky Computers is
going to send your kids to college! Wow, you owe that cabby, big time!
Cranky pops up at the open, then tanks. Slack-jawed and confused, smarting
from the loss and overwhelmed with guilt, you sell. Then, you slump in your chair
and spend the rest of the morning berating yourself for being dumb as a box of rocks.
Hold it. Get it behind you. Next, replace your "bet the ranch" mentality with
the firm assertion that you are an astute trader. From this moment forward, you are
far too wise to ever commit a major portion of your portfolio to any stock. Period.
When someone gives you a hot tip, and you can't resist, research it. If the
stock fits all of your guidelines, buy a limited amount and set a tight stop-loss.
Apply the same well-thought-out plan you assign to your other positions. Say the
rumor's true, and the stock flies up. Take your profits fast. (Market mandate: Buy
the rumor, sell the news.) Maybe (probably) the rumor is false. Sell quick and tell
yourself that your resolve to ignore hot tips is now frrmly in place!
I will admit to checking charts on tips ever since I experienced a good one.
On a flight a few years ago, I overheard two men in the row behind me talking.
One man reminded the other to check out a certain stock when he arrived home;
the stock had great fundamentals and was poised to rise soon.
As soon as I got home, I called my stockbroker with the tip. (Those were the
days before online brokers.) With great amusement and much clucking, my broker
placated me and looked up the stock. Huh, he reported, well the darn thing looked
pretty good. And, yes, he agreed I should buy afew shares. Which I did. And made
money. So there. It's not impossible to make money from hot tips, just improbable. And dangerous if done with great expectations and no discipline.
Hope,faith, and optimism are certainly wonderful attitudes to infuse into our
everyday lives. But please, leave them out of your financial decisions. They can
get you creamed!
Have you ever heard yourself whispering, "Please, please make this stock go
up"? Hope motivates us to send that prayer to the stock market god. She may not


40

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

be listening. Faith makes us declare staunchly to our friends and ourselves (when
our stock is tanking), "It's a good company." (Ever heard those words before?)
Optimism speaks through us, with, "It'll come back. After all, the market has an
upside bias." How do I know these words so well? Believe me, early in my trading
career, I repeated them like a mantra.
For such delightful characteristics, hope, faith, and optimism sure cause
mayhem when they act as decision-making tools in the financial markets. Because
they are detrimental to my wealth, I place mine.in a make-believe basket placed
outside my office door. I reclaim them when I leave for the day. Is that a head game
I play with myself? Sure. Does it save me money? Absolutely. And I'll do it until
my market days are over.
THE END RESULT: WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE

'X0u can only achieve the self-mastery that leads to success, if you know what that
success looks like. Here's the picture: Wisely, you decided to learn all you could
before entering the game. You crossed the market's threshold cautiously. So now,
when you buy or sell a stock, you do so secure in the knowledge that you've
planned for all eventual outcomes.
The feelings. you 'experience are those of serenity, confidence, and detachment. You have no attachment to the outcome of the trade. Robot-like, you observe
the markets, and your stock's reaction to that environment.
In addition, you know yourself. Honest introspection sh~ds light on the emotions you chose to displace, and those that will serve you well. Maybe you're impulsive, stubborn, and have a high tolerance for risk. Recognizing these traits, you've
resolved to displace them with a mindset geared to strict money management.
On the other hand, maybe you're a die-hard perfectionist. You'll approach
each entry and exit driven by the need for precision. Fantastic. It doesn't get any
better than that!
As you gain more knowledge and make more decisions filtered through your
increasing self-mastery, you'll find that experience adds to both knowledge and dis-

. cipline. In other words, it's a self-fulfilling circle. Each component supports the other.
After all, knowledge without disciplin~ is dangerous. Discipline without knowledge
has little value. And you won't ever gain experience without the other two.
Soon, you'll step into the market with the firm conviction of a professional
who knows the market only hurts those who allow it to. And, you'll be taking gains
on a consistent basis.


MASTER A MONEy-MAKING MINDSET

41

R & R: DON'T GO SHOPPING WITHOUT IT

Responsibility and respect represent two of the most important constituents in our
financial-and indeed, our non-financial-lives. They must be an integral part of
our actions.
Ever talk to someone at a cocktail party, who says smugly, "I made 25 percent on my portfolio this year"? Talk to that same person in a bear market, and he
or she will whine, "The market took away 25 percent of my portfolio." Hear the
difference? He or she made the brilliant decisions that increased the portfolio
value. The stock market "took" money away.
You, as a confident market participant, take full responsibility for your portfolio's bottom line. You are aware of the fact that you alone push the "buy" and
"sell" buttons.
You also respect money, especially the money in your account. You realize
that without that capital, you are out of the game completely. You know that the
primary objective when you compete in the financial arena is to protect your capital at all times.
Take a moment to ~eflect. Do you treat your money carefully? Do you pay
your bills on time? Do you spend thoughtfully? Are crumpled $20 bills thrown on
the dresser? Keeping bills carefully organized in your wallet indicate that you
respect money and the power it has.

SELF-RESPECT AND DESERVEDNESS,

The world's most successful traders and investors believe in themselves and their
ability to win. It's a known fact among top traders: The beliefs you have about
yourself as a person will impact the outcome of your profits in a big way!
As Mark Douglas says in The Disciplined Trader, "Contradictory beliefs
cancel your energy because you have a built-in mental conflict between the validity
of one belief, expressing itself only at the direct expense of another belief."s
Do you state in one moment that you can learn how to take big gains out of
the market-and in the next decide you'll never catch on? Do you snatch a rapid
return out of a stock in one week, then "accidentally" give it back the next?
Subconsciously, you may not believe making money rapidly and without backbreaking labor is honest work!
Reflect on your inner level of deservedness. Deep down inside, do you
believe you deserve to be wealthy, or at least to accumulate a lot more money than
you have at the present?

5Douglas. p. 169.


A

42

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Consider this: Money is a means of exchange that provides us with circumstances and experiences 'we could not otherwise have. There is plenty for all.
When we attract abundance and prosperity into our lives, we are able to help
others more fully.
So, declare the truth: You deserve the best life has to offer, including abundant health, happiness, and money!

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

Time for review:
1. The market is timeless and unstructured.
2. To succeed in the market, when we trade we must bring our own structure and order with us.
3. The stock market is always "right."
4. You can fund your account with a hefty sum, buy the most expensive
equipment available, and acquire reams of knowledge about the- market.
But if you can't control your emotions, your account will quickly dissolve.
5. Emotional turmoil colors our perception of reality.
6. Learn to replace emotions of fear and greed, and their variations, with the
calm confidence borne of having a plan in place, and trading according
to that plan.
7. Leave hope, faith, and optimism outside your trading office door.
8. Self-mastery leads to success: You've studied and learned as much as
possible before embarking o~ your trading career; you have an exact plan
for each trade; you stay detached from the outcome of the trade.
9. Responsibility and respect play important roles in the way we feel about
our money, and how we treat it.
10. The world's most successful traders believe in themselves, and so do we.


MASTER A MONEy-MAKING MINDSET

43

......
CENTER POINT

The only way to discover the limits of the possible is to go beyond them, to the
impossible.
-ARTHUR C. CLARKE
Make Your Circle 8igger
As humans, our goal is to reach our highest potential. We are programmed for
excellence! No endeavor is beyond our potential. Once we believe in ourselves,
every activity and goal is within our grasp. Any human experience can be enjoyed
once we decide to venture into the "unknown."
Picture yourself as the center of a circle. Within the space between you and
the circle's circumference is your world, meaning your friends, family, experiences, value system, career, even level of health.
Beyond that circle are the places you've never visited, experiences you've
never had, mindsets you can't imagine, knowledge you haven't learned, points of
view you've never encountered. Also drifting outside your circle reside the wonderful talents you don't realize you have, and the "distant" parts of yourself you've
never explored!
Outside your circle, there are no guarantees. It's a never-never land we gaze
at and refer to as "someday." "Someday I'll write a book." "Someday, I'll learn
to speak French." "Someday, I'll go to Europe." "Someday I'll tell her how
much I love her."
Think of all the people we honor, as geniuses, people who excelled and
gave spectacularly to the world. They ventured outside their circles and stepped
into the unknown: Leonardo da Vinci, Albert Einstein, Gandhi, Galileo, and
Winston Churchill, to name a few, left the safety of the "known" to journey into
the unknown.
In order to grasp all the joy life has to offer, we have to open ourselves to new
experiences. We must go to the edge of our circles and break through the boundaries. That automatically makes our circle bigger. New vistas open up, and we're
on the road to reaching our full, exciting potential!

......



CHAPTER

4

Market Machinations 101 :
The Fuel That Sparks
the Energy
I knowfrom experience that nobody can give me a tip or a series
oftips that will make more moneyfor me than my own judgment.
-JESSE LIVERMORE

This was once overheard from a top technical analyst: "Trading
successfully may be one of the most difficult things to accomplish. We never know for sure whether a specific action will produce a specific result."
Wow, is that accurate! No two trades are ever alike. But then, no
single day in the stock market duplicates another. Every day hurtles through a profusion of different events, judged by millions of mindsets, producing a unique
mixture of consequences.
And always, the final result manifests itself in price.
THE BUCK STOPS HERE

Imagine a giant tornado-like tunnel. At the top of this ferocious, whirling mass of
energy are global events and our reactions to them. The vortex spins with supply
and demand levels, interest rates, and,' cyclical industry shifts. Further down, analysts' reports, company earnings, and the public's opinion on sectors and leading
equities revolves in a constant pirouette. All elements of the maelstrom converge
to a single point: price.
Price is the consensus of opinion in a single moment.
Say you want to sell your current holding in Worldwide Wireless. I want to
buy shares of Worldwide Wireless. We' agree that the current selling price of $60
a share is fair. So we exchange equities for money.
Moments later, the consensus shifts. For Whatever reason, perception of the
value of Worldwide changes. Market players decide the stock is worth more per

45


46

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

share, say $60.25. Once again, shares and money change hands. Have the fundamentals of the company changed in that instant? No. The change in collective consciousness-the perception of reality----:dictated by those who currently
participated in this stock made the change.
Also remember this: When you sell your shares of a stock to me, you believe
the value of the stock will soon shrink. I buy because I believe the value will
increase. In the short term, only one of us will be right!

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS YS. TECHNICAL ANALYSIS:
THE TUG O'WAR

When ~ fITst started investing, I talked to a lot of stockbrokers. The majority of
them relied solely on fundamental analysis' as their decision support tool, quoting
from company financial reports and earnings research for their investment advice.
They fluffed off technical charts as hocus-pocus. Their standard chant: "I've never
met a rich technical analyst."
Tugging on the other end of the rope were the card-carrying'members of the
technical analysts' club. "Who has time," they insisted, "to comb through pages of
sleep-inducing reports? A chart tells you all you need to know."
Fundamental analysis and technical analysis are the two major methods of
examining a publicly traded company to determine the health of its stock. (I've been
told that some folks buy stocks on the .strength of a company's astrological charts
and a system of "sacred numbers," but for now we'll stick to standard analysis.)
Fundamental analysis is like taking an "x-ray" of a company. It examines the
internal financial fitness of an organization and tells us how strong it is.
Fundamental analysts check out the supply and demand levels of the products
and/or services the company produces. Then, they study company reports, profit
and loss summaries, price-to-earnings (PE) ratios (calculated by dividing the
stock's price by its earnings-per-share figure), market share, sales and growth, and
brokerage analyst's ratings. Those who buy and sellon the strength of a company's
fundamentals generally buy a stock "for the long haul," and ignore gymnastics performed by the market on any given day.
Technical analysis is the study of time, price, and sentiment of a chosen
equity (or market or index) as'shown o~ charts. The price action draws patterns on
those charts. And, because human behavior can be repetitive, the price patterns can
be repetitive. When keen-eyed technical analysts recognize one of those formations starting to form, it gives them a set of probabilities on which to base the
stock's next move.


MARKET MACHINATIONS

101:

THE FUEL THAT SPARKS THE ENERGY

47

If fundamentals show us a company's internal strength, then a chart
reveals that stock's personality. As an added benefit, charts allow us to quickly
compare price action of a specific stock to its buddies in the same industry,
and to broader indexes such as the S&P 500. Obviously, charts have the
advantage of speed, showing the "picture is worth a thousand words" theme
in action.
When you utilize fundamental and technical analyses together, you've
got an accurate picture of a company's financial fitness and personality profile. That's why, more and more, we see technical analysts sneaking looks at
a company's fundamental information, and fundamental analysts furtively
peeking at charts.
It appears the tug of war is slowing. Stalwart members of both camps have
softened their stances and released their grips. A truce is in the offing!
We, as wise and profitable short-term traders, recognize the value of both
worlds. When we enter the market, we want all odds possible in our comer. To
that end, the following section shows how to find the most comprehensive fundamental information about a company, in the least amount of time.

FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS: QUICK YET THOROUGH SOURCES

In this age of information, we no longer have to spend hours wading through
pages of a company's mind-numbing financial reports to find out if it's worth our
time and money. Instead, we're going to look at a quick way to check a stock's
fundamental health. (Later in the chapter you'll find Web sites where you can
find more fundamental data about companies on your stock target list.)
The kind folks at Investor's Business Daily (ffiD) have devised a ranking
system for stocks that I find invaluable. Under the guidance and ownership of the
renowned William O'Neil, they provide proprietary ratings that give you a quick
and reliable snapshot of corporate numbers. (Please understand, I am not connected with IBD.)
When I use IBD's ratings method, as opposed to doing my own research,
it's analogous to either eating all the servings of a balanced meal, or taking a vitamin and getting most of the same nutrients in one fast, quick s~allow. The following is the vitamin approach.
You can glance at your stock's listing, check out the six number-letter combination, and thus obtain your daily dose of fundamentals. Then, during your free
time, you can wander through the Web sites listed a bit later in the chapter and
delve into in-depth reports and research.


'A

48

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

IBD PROPRIETARY CORPORATE RATINGS

The Investor's Business Daily SmartSelect ratings cover the following:
.. SmartSelect Composite Rating. Combines all ratings that follow into a

..

..

+-

..

..

combined ranking. The stock's percent off its fifty-two-week high is
included. Results are compared to all other companies; then the stock is
assigned a rating from 1-99. We prefer the stock to rank 70 or higher.
Earnings Per Share (EPS) Rating. Tells you a stock's average short-term
(recent quarters) and long-term (last three years) earnings growth rate. The
number you see is how your company compares to all other companies; the
scale goes from 1-99, with 99 being the highest rating achievable. For our
purposes, we want this number to come in at 70 or higher.
Relative Price Strength (RS) Rating. Measures a stock's relative price
change in the last twelv~ months in comparison to all other equities. Again,
the scale runs from 1-99, and we look for a rating of 70 or higher.
Industry Relative Price Strength Rating. Contrasts a stock's industry price
action in the last six months to the other 196 industries in ffiD's industry list.
The scale is in letters from A to E, with A representing the best-performing
industries. Look for stocks with A or B rankings.
Sales + Profit Margins + ROE (Return on Equity) Rating. Crunches a
firm's sales growth rate during the last three quarters, before and after
profit margins and return on equity into a letter. Again, the ratings are A-E.
We want stocks rated A or B.
Accumulation/Distribution Rating. Applies a formula of price and volume
changes in the last thirteen weeks to determine if it is being accumulated
(bought) or distributed (sold). Again, ratings are A-E, with A equals heavy
buying, C equals neutral, and E equals heavy selling. This "AcclDis" rating
is very important. Choose stocks with an A or B.

These ratings are located next to the stock's listing in the

mo

tables. For

example, you would find your target stock and see: 99, 99, 99, A, A, A, 72 (represents fifty-two-week high) Cranky Computers (then the rest of the quote information, etc.). Of course, the three 99s and the three As indicate the highest ratings
possible; such a stock probably doesn't exist! Still, you can understand how fast
this number/letter combination gives you an instant picture of a company's internal
health. Sweet, huh?
In addition, check ffiD's "The mD List," published in each weekend edition
(on Fridays). The roster inventories the best issues the S&P.500 has to offer in
earnings per share ratings of 80 or higher. Also included are each stock's ticker
symbol, industry (IBD tracks 197 industries),. earnings growth rate, and First Call


MARKET MACHINATIONS

101:

THE FUEL THAT SPARKS THE ENERGY

49 '

(www.thomsonfinancial.com)earningsestimate.It.s a great list to pull stocks from
in order to formulate your own personal "watch list."

MORE INSTANT INFO: CNBC, CNN, AND BLOOMBERG

Walk into any trading room, and you will no doubt see televisions perched near
the ceiling tuned to CNBC, CNN, and Bloomberg financial networks. They report
global events, and interview nabobs such as CEOs, political pundits, and institutional analysts. It's important for you to stay abreast of all events that affect your
portfolio, so it's a good idea to listen to one of these networks whenever you can.
Sometimes CNBC will feature an off-the-wall, self-declared "expert"
sporting a baseball cap topped with a propeller and waving a fistful of balloons
pushing municipal bonds, just to see if we're awake. Overall, though, the penguin
tape is my favorite. When a bunch of analysts gang up on a company and all
downgrade it on the same day, CNBC shows a group of penguins waddling to the
edge of their ice float, then plunging all at once into the chilly water. Oh, how a
little humor adds balance to the puckered-brow world of dollars and (sometimes
little) sense!
And while we're on this subject, basing your stock picks on analysts'
upgrades and downgrades will send you to Pecan Manor (the nut house).
Remember, analysts think in terms of long-term holds, not a few days or weeks.
Many people trade and invest according to financial network news. Just keep
in mind that trading news can go against you. Again, the old market caveat, "Buy
the rumor, sell the news" remains true.
How many times have you watched companies announce good earnings
news only to see the stock price get driven into the ground the next day? The good
news/price plummet syndrome sometimes happens because the earnings news
leaked out early and the price rose before the announcement. Or, maybe the host
industry is stuck in a nasty downtrend, and no amount of good news will induce
buyers to step to the plate. Generally speaking, good news lasts for one day, and
bad news for three days.
However, if Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan appears on your screen and utters
phrases like "irrational exuberance," and "looming inflation," pay attention.
Before he reaches the end of either of those sentences, start pushing the sell button
as fast as you can!
Use financial network news as a great overall global and market picture, and
to stay aware of market sentiment. As a rule, though, refrain from basing single
trades on lightning-bolt'announcements.
Before we leave newspapers and networks, I want to mention the Wall Street
Journal, first published in July 1889 by Charles Dow, and its sister paper,
I


50

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Barron's, which hits the streets on weekends. Alan Abelson's crusty opening commentary, "Up and Down Wall Street," alone is worth the price of the subscription.
Both are excellent financial resources published by D.ow Jones & Co.

WONDERFUL WEB SITES TO WANDER THROUGH

The World Wide Web offers more financial research than you could ever hope to
wade through in a lifetime! One report ventured that more than 13,000 financial
Web sites now grace cyberspace. I suspect the true number runs much higher.
Here's a micro-list of well-known, well-rounded sites to jump-start your research.
Some are free, some offer a free trial subscription, and then charge a nominal
monthly price. Enjoy!

.. Big Charts (www.bigcharts.com). Bills itself as "the world's coolest
charting and research site. Free interactive charts, quotes, industry
analysis, intra-day stock screeners, market news, and commentary. The
charts at this Web site offer most all indicator studies, plus you can
overlay indexes on stock charts. Great charts for beginners who don't
have charting software yet.
.. BigEasy Investor (www.bigeasyinvestor.com).Popularamongtraders.this
easy-to-use free site offers stock screening, charts, analysis, and research. It
also features extensive educational tools for both novice and seasoned
traders. The Trader's Playbook shows "hows" and "whys" of good plays,
and the Trader's Dictionary offers a great resource on market terms.
-+- BigTrends.com (www.bigtrends.com). A good Web site for traders that
offers daily market analysis, e-mail newsletters, feature articles, and
trading education by Price Headley. Additional subscription services and
products available.
". Bloomberg (www.bloomberg.com). Offers news, detailed stock lists, quotes,
and more. Also, you can sign up for Bloomberg's Market Monitor, which will
track up to ten stocks or indexes and give you updates on their performance.
'+- CBS Market -Watch (www.cbs.marketwatch.com). Offers a portfolio
tracker, stock screener, charting utilities for technical analysis with direct
links to data from Hoover's and Zack's.
... ClnetNews.com (www.investor.cnet.com). Links to the latest news stories
and snapshots of current market activity, quotes, SEC filings, company
profiles, and competitors. Targets tech companies/news.
.., DailyStocks.com (www.dailystocks.com).This site bills itself as the Web's
first and biggest stock research site. It offers research including quotes and


MARKET MACHINATIONS

..

-+-

.•

-+-

..

+-

-+-

-+-

++

101:

THE FUEL THAT SPARKS THE ENERGY

51

screens. If you still can't find the data you need, Daily Stocks boasts a
three-page list of links to other Web sites.
Fairmark Press (wwwfairmark.com). Tax guide for traders/investors.
Offers tax forms and publications, books, and handy "Reference Room,"
a message board for tax questions.
Hoover's Online (www.hoovers.com). Lots of information, including profiles of public and private companies, IPO (initial public offering) pages,
and industry research.
Investor's Business Daily (www.investors.com). Features selected articles
from the daily newspaper. Provides easy-to-use stock charts and screens.
You can also access IBD's stock ratings through the "Stock Doctor" section.
Microsoft MoneyCentral (www.moneycentral.msn.com). Real-time
quotes and portfolio and charting tools. Provides timely news, analysis,
SEC filings, and a stock and fund screener. An inside view from six professional advisers, insider trading, and analyst recommendations.
The Motley Fool (wwwfool.com). A comprehensive site where your portfolio can link to customizable charts, quotes, news, estimates, and other
data. Offers one of the liveliest message boards around.
Quicken.com (www.quicken.com). A full-service personal-finance site
that includes banking, mortgage, and insurance information. It offers a
portfolio tracker, quotes, a stock screener, news, and a mutual fund finder.
In addition, you will find a retirement planner and a Roth IRA calculator.
Quote.com (www.finance.lycos.com). Provides real-time market information and displays an unlimited number of charts, quote sheets, hot lists,
historical time and sales data, and summary period data-all updated live
in real time.
Silicon Investor (www.siliconinvestor.com). Has news, real-time quotes,
research, StockTalk, and a host of award-winning message boards. One of
the best tech stock sites on the Web.
sixer.com (www.sixer.com). A Web site for traders that provides technical
analysis, market news, community discussions, and trading education.
.Their "active game plan" offers watchlists for traders.
SmartMoney.com (www.smartmoney.com). A business and financial Web
site offering commentary, portfolio tracking, a stock watch list, charting
center, daily market reports, and hourly updates. It includes quotes, news,
a fund finder, company snapshots, analyst recommendations, and more.

+ StockCharts (www.stockcharts.com).Everythingaboutchartsyou·ve
ever wanted to know, and then some. Good market commentary, along
with sections on "Tools & Charts" and "Chart School," which lists every


52

A

..

..

+

...

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

type of chart imaginable. "The Experts" features advice from noted technical analysts like Arthur Hill and John Murphy.
TheStreet.com (www.thestrl!et.com). Gives expert analysis of the investment scene before, during, and after the trading day. It provides quotes,
fund facts/scoreboards, portfolio tracker, stock/fund charts, Thomson
reports, and SEC filings .
Thomson Investor Network (www.thomsoninvest.net). Offers news and
expert tips. You can see what analysts at some of the mega-brokerage
houses think of your stock picks. Check out the "First Call" earnings estimate section.
TradingMarkets (www.tradingmarkets.com). Geared to traders and active
investors, this excellent and highly professional site includes top-notch
educational sections. Also, check out the message boards, Stock Scanner,
commentaries, and intra-day updates. Well worth the nominal monthly fee.
Yahoo! Finance (www.quote.yahoo.com). Tools include a stock screener,
portfolio, message boards and stock chat area, a personal stock pager, and
company profiles. One page will display quotes and historical charts, current news, and links to research and related user messages.

After you scan these sites, you'll find your favorites that you'll return to time
after time, and you'll also find new ones that pique your interest. Also, check my
Web site, www.tonitumer.com. The Financial Links p~ge lists an updated selection
of sites you may want to check out.

MAGAZINES
co~e to mind that target traders, Active Trader
(www.activetradermag.com) and Stocks & Commodities (www.traders.com).
Active Trader comes chock-full of articles that educate traders about everything

Two excellent magazines

from market psychology to pattern analysis. Its "Trading Basics" section speaks
primarily to novice traders, and is well worth the read. Stocks and Commodities
does a great job of explaining various indicators and how to use them, among other
topics. It also gives sector (industry) reviews and interviews industry gurus.
Of course, a whole host of magazines geared to investors and American business line the newsstand shelves. Most are treasure troves of educational material,
but are not to be depended on for up-to-the-second fundamental information. The
time lag between the writing and go-to-press dates make fundamentals too dated
for short-term traders.
In the upcoming chapters, you're going to learn charting basics and how to
choose a stock. It's going to get hectic, so get your rest and take your vitamins!


MARKET MACHINATIONS

101:

THE FUEL THAT SPARKS THE ENERGY

53

CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING

See how are you doing so far:
1. Price is the consensus of opinion on a stock in a single moment.
2. Fundamental analysis and technical analysis are the two major methods of
examining a publicly traded company to determine the health of its stock.
3. Fundamental analysts study supply and demand levels of the products
and/or services the company produces. They also study company
reports, profit and loss summaries, price-to-earnings (PE) ratios (calculated by dividing the stock's price by its earnings-per-share figure),
market share, sales and growth, and brokerage analyst ratings.
4. Technical analysis is the study of time, price, and sentiment of a chosen
equity (or market or index) as shown on charts.
5. Investor's Business Daily (IBD) provides proprietary ratings that give
you a quick and reliable snapshot of corporate fundamentals.
6. CNBC, CNN, and Bloomberg television networks are used as great overall
global and market resources and to stay aware of market sentiment. As a
rule, though, refrain from basing single trades on lightning-bolt netwo~k
announcements.


54

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

•••
CENTER POINT

Follow your heart, your dreams, your desires. Do what your soul calls you to do,
whatever it is, and allow it to be finished; then you will go onto another adventure.
-RAMTHA

Invite Spontaneity into Your Life

The stock market is a rigid mistress. Those who meet with success in her playground must proceed each day armed with exacting guidelines and principles, a
structured mindset, and unyielding discipline. Optimism, hope, and spontaneity
must be avoided at all times.
When we leave this arena, however, in order to achieve balance and refresh
our spirits, it's beneficial to shift our perspectives and mindsets to the opposite end
of the spectrum, and invite spontaneity into our world.
Spontaneity means trying anything on the spur of the moment, just because it's
an experience you might enjoy. The actual experience may turn out differently than
you imagine it might, but you'll surely have a good time finding out and sometimes,
impulsive actions have exciting results that ultimately change your life for the better.
If you act spontaneously, and especially if those around you don't expect it, you
may be labeled as irresponsible. Good. What fun! Wouldn't you rather be the one
having the adventure, rather than the one who stayed behind and gossiped about it?
We all know "higher ups" who get stuck on their thrones, who forsake the art
and joy of spontaneity. They march through their lives with ramrod backs, noses held
high, and blinders in place. When presented with a new suggestion, their standard
retort is, "We've never done it that way before, and we're not changing things now."
Conversely, what do you want to wager that the zipper, the paper clip, and the
hula-hoop flew out of nowhere to zap their open-minded inventors with a spontaneous bolt of genius?
We spoke in an earlier discussion of the masks we wear that disguise our inner
light. Spontaneity chips off those masks and reveals our true spirit ofjoy just beneath.
For fun, consider indulging yourself in a spontaneous act, or two (three?), this
week. Grab the phone and call someone you haven't talked to in years. Jump up
from your desk in the middle of the day and take a fast walk around the block. Call
out to the hotdog vendor that you'd miss him if he weren't there. Ask one of your
children to go to a Disney movie. Do a somersault in the park.
And remember, sometimes an act of joyful spontaneity results in unexpected
blessings that last a lifetime!

•••


CHAPTER

5

Market Machinations 102:
Basic Charting Techniques
That Make You Money
My plan of trading was sound enough and won oftener than it
lost. If I had stuck to it I'd have been right perhaps as often as
seven out of ten times.
-JESSE LIVERMORE

Chapter 4 showed you where to find quick yet comprehensive fundamental information. Now, it's time to begin learning the basic
skills of technical analysis. I fully. realize that the words "technical
analysis" scare the bejeepers out of most people, but I promise you, it's
not as intimidating as it sounds.
Just keep this in mind: The moment you start absorbing the charting essentials in this chapter and those that follow, you will be way ahead of most market
players-and on your way to pocketing bigger profits.
First, let's take a quick look at how cycles playa role in the way the financial markets pulsate through time.

CYCLES: THE WORLD'S OPERATING SYSTEM

Our world, indeed our universe, operates on a system of cycles. We know that the
Earth, along with her sister planets, orbits around the sun. A complete orbit equals
a cycle, which we refer to as a "year." Predictable weather patterns create four seasons, each with its own cycle, within that year. Tides flow in and out on exact
cycles. Humans and all living creatures experience cycles of life, including birth,
childhood, puberty, adulthood, and passing on.
Industrialized economies progress through cycles of expansion, peaking,
trough, and expansion again. It follows then that the major industries propelling
those economies pass through four phases during their existence: introduction,
growth, maturity, and decline. Those industries consist of separate companies, and

55


56

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

of course, the securities issued by those companies tend to anticipate business
cycles and move in the same direction.
when you look at a stock chart (Figure 5-1), you can observe its price history
and the cycles-or series of peaks and troughs-that it's completed so far.

Cycle One

I

Trough

I

I

I

Trough

I
Figure 5-1.
Economic cycles.

If you observe a monthly or weekly chart, where each bar or candlestick (we
discuss candlesticks in Chapter 6) represents one month or one week, respectively,
you may be able to look at a stock's price history for an exten,ded duration of time,
such as five to ten years. Although the cycles may not be formed as uniformly as
those drawn in Figure 5-1, they will still etch a bell-curve, or cycle formation, consisting of peaks and valleys, or troughs.
These cycles take place from the macrocosm. to the microcosm. Each large
cycle consists of many smaller cycles, and each small' cycle' is formed by a
sequence of even tinier cycles.
Here's an analogy: This book is made of many chapters. Within each chapter
are separate sections that, when strung together, \create that chapter. The sections
are made of a series of paragraphs; the paragraphs are built of sentences, which
are foimed by words. Each word, sentence, paragraph, and section is a complete
unit in and of itself. And, when looked at as a whole, they form the complete
book. Get the picture?
So, you will find complete cycles occurring on monthly, weekly, daily, and
intra-day stock charts, where one bar or candlestick may represent a time frame of


MARKET MACHINATIONS

102:

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

57

one month, one week, one day, or intra-day designations, such as sixty minutes,
thirty minutes, five minutes, one minute, or any increment in-between.

LET'S DRAW THE CURTAIN ON STAGE ANALYSIS

A "close-up" of a cycle, whatever the time frame, reveals that it's constructed of four
different movements, or stages. We call the study of these stages "Stage Analysis."
When you learn how to identify which of the four price stages (Figure 5-2)
your target stock currently inhabits, you've made the first step to keeping your
losses small and your profits large!

Stage Three
(Eeeek!)

I Stage Four I

Stage One

I
•
Figure 5·2.
Four stages of acycle.

. Stage One represents the valley, or trough, of the cycle. This is when the
stock prices are at their lows of the cycle. During these times-which on weekly
and daily charts could last from weeks to months-the stock price moves sideways in a range between an approximate high and low price, and increments in
between. You'll hear gurus and analysts talk about a stock in Stage One as
"basing." That means the stock is forming a new price base from which it will
(hopefully!) start to rise again.


58

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

What is the collective mindset of market players participating in a Stage One?
Volatile vacillation! Buyers hold the price up each time it falls to the bottom of the
base, and sellers push it down each time it rises to the top of the base. Equal pressure from buyers and sellers cause the stock to oscillate sideways, sort of like a
snak~ swiveling through a drainage pipe.
When the stock bases for a period of time, market conditions, industry rotation, or good news will urge buyers to step in and start paying higher prices. Then,
the price "b~eaks out" of its base and shoots into an uptrend, or Stage Two. The
collective mindset-greed--creates more and more demand, which drives the
stock higher. Rising, then pulling back and rising again, it rockets to higher and
higher prices on the wings of euphoria.
Finally, at its peak, buyers refuse to continue paying higher prices, and the
uptrend slows to a halt. Euphoria and demand dissipate. So the uptrend, or Stage
1\vo, is broken, and the stock drifts sideways into a Stage Three. Technical analysts refer to this pattern as "rolling over."
During Stage Three, which is the peak of the cycle, ,buyers support, or "hold
up," the price when it falls. Sellers press the price down when it rises. As you can
see, the stock price seems suspended in "mid-air." The collective emotion in a
stock experiencing Stage Three: indecision.
At some point, when a stock is in a Stage Three, fear steps to the forefront.
(If it doesn't, and the stock breaks out to new highs, it resumes a Stage Two.) When
fear sets in, buyers refuse to support the stock any longer. Selling pressure
increases and the stock tumbles into a downtrend, into a Stage Four.
Now the stock "heads south." In a Stage Four (which looks like a Stage Two,
reversed) the stock dives to lower prices, rebounds a bit, and then dives again
(think: "rubber rock"). Supply floods the market as fear goads terrified sellers into
unloading their long positions.
The only happy campers who hold a Stage Four stock are short sellers. As
you may remember, short-sellers sell the stock at a high price. Then, they buy it
back at a lower price and pocket the difference as profit. (We'll go into selling
short later.)
Stage Four is also the place where frustrated
investors, watching their stocks tank and principal
shrink, may "average down" by buying more of the
As a general rule.
losing issue. Because averaging down lowers the
.stocks·fall three times
average price paid for the stock, their fervent hope is
faster than they rise.
that when the stock rebounds, losses will r~coup faster.
Why? . Fearfu',> panicky
sellers react even faster
Maybe. Maybe not. Some beat-up stocks stay
!han·buyersrl1()t,lYat~d
down for the count, or at least for weeks and months.
by··greed"andeuphorial
Hanging onto these weaklings ties up money that could


MARKET MACHINATIONS

102:

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

59

be spent on a strong stock that makes money. We sometimes call capital invested
in such issues "dead money."
Since we're on this subject, if you have the "averaging down" mentality,
please banish it. There's a correct way to average down that's based on sound
money-management principals; then there's the desperate averaging down method
that usually leads to bigger losses. In the pages that follow, you'll learn how to
average down properly.
Stage Four is also when some investors, believing they're getting a "bluelight special," load the truck with a tanking issue. Watch them go slack-jawed
when their cheap stock gets even cheaper!
As an astute trader, you won't let that happen to you. You'll stand on the sidelines, cash in hand, while others hold losers or run screaming to the door. Then,
when the selling is over, you'll step in and buy high-quality bargains that are ready
to recover. Sound like fun? It is!
At some point, a stock in a Stage Four will slow its descent. Hot and furious
selling evaporates, and buyers start stepping up to the plate. Now the stock turns
back into a sideways, basing pattern-a Stage One-and the cycle is complete.

DIFFERENT STAGES CALL FOR DIFFERENT REACTIONS

With a little practice in looking at charts, you'll start recognizing which stage of
a cycle a stock is experiencing. This in turn will initiate your selection process for
buying stocks.
We use Stage One to scan for stocks that are basing, preferably for four to
six weeks. Again, these stocks are in the first stage of a new cycle, and usually
coincide with a market or industry correction. This is when a stock is "on sale."
Usually, we don't buy stocks in Stage One. We monitor them. When they break
. out of their base in synchronicity with other factors, that's when we jump in!
Stage Two is where you, as a short-term trader, will spend most of your time
and make most of your profits. When you're position trading, you spot a stock
breaking out of a solid Stage One base into a Stage Two uptrend. You buy it and
ride it for several weeks, taking profits when it completes its entire Stage Two.
If you opt to swing trade, you play Stage Two by buying the break outs and
selling before the stock pulls back, taking multiple-point profits out of two-to-five
day holds. With practice, you may decide to do a combination of both position
trading and swing trading. I like this method for capturing optimum profits!
When a stock rolls over into a Stage Three, we stand aside. During this stage,
price patterns tend toward the volatile and unpredictable, and a stock may lurch
sideways in a haphazard pattern. It's particularly unwise to hold a Stage Three
stock overnight.


60

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Again, stocks that fall into a Stage Four are
doomed to suffer lower and lower prices. There are
two ways to treat a stock in a Stage Four downtrend.
While•• astQQRina
First, if you are relatively new to the stock market
.···stage·.•Three.• price>pai"
and have no prejudices against selling short-that's
tern experiencesthe
good news! When you arrive at Chapter 12, which
same sideways movetalks about shorting, you'll want to study it thorm.ent as aStage One,
thetimethatastock
oughly to maximize your profits. Or, perhaps
staysinaStagelbr~e
you've been in the market for a while and already
canbellluchsnorter
realize the profit potential in selling high and
than·, a·•• 8tage· One. In .this
buying
low. You may even hedge your account by
volatile market,l'veseefl
selling short.
stocks. complete:aStage
Three inasingledayJ
The second way to approach a stock in a Stage
Four downtrend is to avoid it completely! If shorting
a stock-or even the thought of it-makes you break into a sweat, then sidestep
stocks in a crash and burn mode. ·During times when major market indexes
plummet to new lows (read Bear Market), as they did in the fall of 2000 and
spring of 2001, you can keep your assets in cash and take a vacation. Or, spend
the your time off to read up on advanced trading techniques.
Remember, one of the most important lessons any trader or any investor
can learn is when to stay out of the market altogether!

ADDITIONAL CYCLE COMPONENTS

Now that we've identified the stages inherent in cycles, let's zoom in even closer
to analyze the action.
In the illustration that follows (Figure. 5-3), you
can see motivating factors in each ~tage. (Keep in
':;.- :::)<.<:;::>;><, /\':;
mind that many small stages form the larger stages.)
Swing-arid--PQsltion
It's
interesting to note that while a stock experiencing
traders who stare at.·
a Stage Two uptrend on a daily chart may be soaring
intra-day charts ofthelr
on
the wings of optimism, greed, and euphoria, a
holdings•• many•• tiJ11~s
get."shakenOyt"gfth~iJ
glance at an intra-day chart may reveal intervals-not
.•·• • ·P.os.itions•• eatly.• • •IA•• peUer
apparent on a daily chart-where apprehension and
plan:Onceyou'reiQ:~
outright panic prevail.
trade, set an automatic,
Aside from emotions, Figure 5-3 also shows
trailing stop-16ssand
notations referring to supply and demand. As discheck the stock's
progress afewtilIl6S
cussed in Chapter 2, greed and fear act as precursors
auringJheday.
to these two economic factors.
~;:::',':','."::.-.:>.->-


MARKET MACHINATIONS

102:

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

61

Indecision

Euphoria

Panic

Greed

High t!emant!

Indecision

Indecision

Stage One

Stage One

Figure 5·3.
Supply/demand cycle.

In Stage One, indecision causes supply and demand for a stock to alternate
in the short-term, pushing it sideways. When optimism (mild greed) triggers a
stock to break out of a Stage One into a Stage Two, greed for the stock at that price
causes increasing demand. The· greed amplifies as more and more buyers absorb
all available stock (supply) at each higher price level.
When the price gets "frothy," or "toppy," at the height of a Stage Two,
demand will shrink as increased supply, provided by sellers taking profits, arrives
in the marketplace.
As the stock rolls over into a Stage Three, indecision reigns again. Just as in
Stage One, supply and demand remain in relative balance, although volatile
swings are the norm.
Sooner or later, buyers will tum their backs on a Stage Three stock and
decide to take profits. Supply floods the market. When no one steps in to buy,
these buyers-turned-sellers must lower their prices to attract buyers. This initiates
a Stage Four. Now, apprehension turns to fear, causing even more sellers to join
the ranks, which pushes more and more supply onto the market at each lower
price level. Just ~s greed iIiitiates demand, so does fear initiate supply. It becomes
a self-perpetuating action and reaction.


62

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Finally, when the falling price reaches a support area established weeks,
months, or even years ago (as seen on a weekly or daily chart), supply begins to be
absorbed by tentative buyers. As they continue to soak up the supply, the stock ceases
making lower lows. Selling volume dries up, and buyers start to step in. Supply and
demand even out, and the stock reverts to a Stage One to begin a new cycle.
Figures 5-4 through 5-7 show two weekly charts (each bar equals one week)
and two daily charts (each bar equals one day) of stocks that have made complete
cycles. Check out how fear and greed incite supply and demand to drive stock
prices up and down.

',,"Veekly

Bar

(Right) ADCT -ADCTELECOMMUNICATIONS

Volume

2000
I

!

i
!

1

i

.,, ~T9'O,O'.' .eY"09T,+ott

t~ t ~tlqt~
O.~

1~ t trf~lrt~1

~t

l
W'rl ~l l

,.2001

45

I

I

40

r

't,

,

35

I!~ I~ ~t :
I

30

Ii t '+~ t ~

!

Qtt

50

I

!
i

!i

.

t••

25
20
15

'0
'00000000

M

J

J

AS

0

NO

J

F

MA

M

J

J

AS

0

NO

J

F

Figure 5·4.
On this chart, which marks the weekly activity of ADC Telecommunications (ADCT), you can clearly see the bell
curve of the stock's complete price cycle.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


MARKET MACHINATIONS

Weekly'

1,02:

Bar

(Right) INTC-INTEL CORP

63

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

Volume

2001
75
70
65
60
55
I

I, ~ tl~ l
rI

50

45

!

t~~df~~!l~

40
35
30

I
I

J

25

50000000:

M

J

J

AS

0

NO

J

F

MA

tv!

J

J

AS

0

NO

J

~

Figure 5·5.
This chart of Intel Corp. (INTC) also shows a weekly cycle. INTC's price pattern shows a stock with a more
volatile "personality" than ADCT.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

SUPPORT AND RESISTANCE, OR ACTION AND REACTION

Now we're going to add the final, yet mega-important components to the cycles:
support and resistance. These two factors are the actual outcome, or the result of,
the interaction between fear and greed and supply and demand. Understanding
how they all work together is like watching a magnificent, orchestrated dance. It
also gives you a giant advantage for making money.
As you read, keep this statement in the forefront of your mind: for every
action, there is a reaction.
Support and resistance will form the foundation for every trading decision.
You can trade without oscillators and indicators and moving averages. You can
even eliminate charts altogether from your financial decisions (although I
wouldn't recommend it). But even floor traders in commodities pits who rarely


64

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

see a chart will mentally compute where price resistance and support lie, even as
they shout and use hand signals (called "open outcry") to get their orders filled.

Daily

(Right) SAC - BANK OF AMERICA CORP

Bar

Volume

58

~~'~f, ~

ijt+

56

1~~~"~6f~t, ~,~! y '~'fij ,,~, ~'ijl
u,~

~

54

,.

52
50
48

f

'Itt~~t~

lij t

46

44
42

10000000

Jul

Aug

Sep

Od

Figure 5·6.
This daily chart of Bank of America (BAC) shows the complete cycle of aprice pattern that took approximately
five months.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics. Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

The concept behind support and resistance is a simple one, and once you
digest it, you will have absorbed the basic premise underlying market moves.
I used the following analogy in my previous book~ A Beginner's Guide to Day
Trading Online. I'm using it again because it gives such a clear image of support
and resistance in action.
Picture this: You're standing in the living room of a house, on the first floor. In
your hands, you hold a ball. This ball equals the price of a stock. You toss the ball
over your head. It soars upward, and hits the ceiling. The ceiling keeps it from rising
higher, so the ceiling equals resistance. Now, the ball falls back down and bounces
on the floor. The floor stops it from falling further, so the floor equals support.


MARKET MACHINATIONS

102:

65

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

Next, you spot a hole in the ceiling. You throw the ball as hard as you can, and
it flies through the hole in the ceiling. It rises to the second-story ceiling and hits
it. That ceiling equals resistance. Then, the ball falls to bounce on the second-story
floor, which now forms support. Understand that the first-story ceiling supports the
second-story floor. Result? Resistance becomes support.

Daily

(Right) JNJ - JOHNSON 8. JOHNSON

Bar Volume
2001

106
104
102
100

98
96
94

92
90

5000000

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 5-7.
This daily chart of Johnson &Johnson (JNJ) shows acomplete price cycle. Notice how the Stage Three rollover
lasted for one day!
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Continue by running upstairs and grabbing the baIt Throw it back through
the hole, down into the first-story living room. When it drops through the hole in
the floor, it breaks through support. It falls to bounce on the living room floor, or
previous support.
Then, it rises to hit the ceiling, or previous resistance.
Run back down the stairs. Take the ball and toss it through a hole in the floor.
The ball descends to the basement floor, which forms support. Then, it rises to


66

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

bounce off the basement ceiling, resistance. Just above the basement is the living
room floor, which use~ to provide support. So now, previous support forms resistance. Figure 5-8 illustrates support and resistance.

Floor
Ceiling

Floor

I~
II' I

Floor

"I

Ceiling

I
I

Figure 5-8.
Support and resistance.

When the ball, which we'll now think of as a stock price, bounces off of support or resistance, we refer to it as a pivot point (Figure 5-9).

I

Pivot point

Support
Resistance 11

IJ. Support

I

Pivot point

I
Figure 5-9.
Pivot point.

I


MARKET MACHINATIONS

102:

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

67

As you study support and resistance, remember,
they are price areas. You will have to find a specific
price to refer to, for example $54, but give it a little
leeway. Picture yourself jumping on a trampoline. The
trampolin.e supports you when you land on it, but the
depth of your bounce varies a little each time. Also, just
as heavier people stretch the trampoline base lower
when they land, more volatile stocks need a little extra
latitude in theif resistance and support areas.
Since you now know what support and resistance
look like, let's quickly find out how they actually form. Go back to imagining the
ball bouncing from floor to ceiling in the basement. Now, apply that to a stock in
a Stage One, or basing price pattern. The basement floor is support, and we call it
that because buyers are supporting th~ price. Were it to start lower, buyers (greed
+ demand) step in and accumulate, thus keeping the price from sinking lower.
When the price rises to the basement ceiling, it hits resistance. Resistance
equals buyers who jam their hands in their pockets and refuse to pay a higher price
for the stock. Also, resistance equals supply. At this point, some previous buyers,
as mentioned before, revert into sellers. Afraid (fear) the stock will rise no higher,
they offer their stock for sale, thus flooding the market with supply. If the stock
falls here, the next time it rises to return to this price area, it may sell off again.
Why? Because we have memories!
Say the stock shoots through the resistance (supply is absorbed). Maybe the
sector it inhabits is in a favorable spotlight, the bulls are in control of the market,
or the company itself enjoys a spurt of good news. The price will continue to
rocket-maybe for hours or days-until a new factor suppresses it. When it "sells
off," that pivot point creates fresh resistance. The stock then falls to the earlier
resistance area, which is now the "floor," or support. It will hold there if buyers
absorb the supply, and in so doing, "support" it.
Support and resiStance levels apply on every chart you'll ever see, whatever
the time frame. In fact, you may have guessed by now that all the applications
you'll learn about charts hold true on all time frames. That means the concepts
you find in these pages pertain not only to swing-and-position trading, but also to
strategies including active trading and traditional buy-and-hold investing.
Figures 5-10, 5-11, and 5-12 show support and resistance areas on a weekly
chart, a daily chart, and a fifteen-minute intra-day chart. As you study these
charts and observe support and resistance levels, you may be amazed athow reliable they are!


68

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Weekly

Bar

(Right) AFCI- ADVANCED FIBRE COMMUNIC

Volume

2001

2000

90

I

i

ao

i
!

. 70
60
50
40

T',~

20000000

i
J

AS

0

N

D

J

F

M

AM

J

J

AS

0

N

D

J

20

10

I
I

I

J

30

F

Figure 5-10.
This weekly chart of Advanced Fibre Communications (AFCI) shows acomplete cycle with distinct support and
r~sistance areas. Note how the stock returns all the way down (Jan. 2001) to rest on the support established in 1999.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Now, secure in the knowledge that you assimilated all the material in this
chapter, we'll continue a custom I established in my previous book, A Beginner's

Guide to Day Trading Online. ...
From now on, this is an interactive book! The quiz below is designed to tell
you how much you recall of the current chapter. Remember, in the high-stakes
game of trading, the more knowledge you bring with you to the market, the more
money you'll make. So, here's your chance to find out what "stuck," and what you
may want to review.


MARKET MACHINATIONS

Dally

102:

Bar

(Right) CIEN - OENA CORP

69

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

Volume

2001
150
140
130

120
110
100
90

80
70
60

20000000

Od

Feb

Jan

Dec'

Nov

Figure 5·11.
On this wild and woolly daily chart of Ciena Corp. (CIEN), notice how previous resistance hampers the stock's
future move to the upside. Remember, resistance translates into supply, or sellers dumping their stock on the
market. Resistance can also consist of short sellers, who recognize the upcoming resistance area and sell the
stock short into it, intending to buy it back at alower price and pocket the profits.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.
Intraday

(Right) CSC[; - CISCO SYSTEMS (l5-Min)

2/12

Bar

Volume

2/13

~

2/14
303/4

I

1

301/2
301/4

30
293/4
-----~~----HfiI+_----~I__-----_i+H+_H291/2

291/4

29
283/4
281/2
281/4
----+-INJ-------~------~~------L

28

5000000

1200

14'00

1000

1200

14:00

10:00

1200

14:00

10'00

12:00

1400

16:00

Figure 5·12.
All time frames encounter support and resistance. Here, afifteen-minute chart of Cisco Systems (CSCO) completes an entire cycle and forms definite support and resistance levels. Note how the high made right after the
open on February 13 (2/13) served as resistance when the stock tried to make another high that afternoon.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


A

70

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

QUIZ

1. Name the different stages in a typical stock price cycle, and describe in
which direction each stage moves.
2. Specify the collective mindset that applies to each stage.
3. True or False? The trading method known as "averaging down" is the
best way to recoup your losses when you're holding onto a tanking stock.
4. Briefly name options available to short-term traders in each stage of a
stock's cycle.
5. Which emotion fuels supply-greed or fear? Which one fuels demand?
6. Referring to the "ball bouncing between the floor and ceiling" analogy,
what does the floor represent-support or resistance? Which of the two
does the ceiling represent?
7. Continuing with the same analogy, when the ball soars through a hole in
the ceiling and bounces on the floor above, what does that depict on a
stock chart? What if the ball drops through the floor, then bounces up to
hit the ceiling?
8. What denotes major r~sistance or support?
9. What is a "pivot point"?
10. True or False? Support and resistance levels apply on every chart, regardless of the time frame.


MARKET MACHINATIONS

102:

BASIC CHARTING TECHNIQUES

71

ANSWERS

1. Four stages create a stock's price cycle. Stage One is a sideways, or
basing movement. Stage Two represents the uptrend. Stage Three is the
peak, or topping action, in which the stock moves sideways. Stage Four
is the downtrend. When the downtrend ends and the stock turns up again,
it initiates a Stage On~ and the cycle repeats itself.
2. The collective mindset in a Stage One: indecision. Stage Two: greed.
Stage Three: indecision. Stage Four: fear.
3. Very big False!
4. Stage One: We monitor stocks in this basing action, ready to spot a
buying opportunity when they break into a Stage Two uptrend. Stage
Two: As swing and position traders, we spend most of our time playing
stocks in a Stage Two; we work the uptrend, with the intention of grabbing multiple-point profits. Stage Three: We avoid stocks experiencing
this stage. Stage Four: We either take advantage of short selling strategies, or stand aside until the stock assumes a more positive price pattern.
5. Fear fuels supply. Greed fuels demand.
6. Floor equals support. Ceiling equals resistance.
7. Resistance becomes support. Support becomes resistance.
8. Major resistance or support is noted when a stock bounces off a support
or resistance area three times, or more.
9. A "pivot point" is when a stock price reverses direction.
10. True.


72

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

•••
CENTER POINT

All substance is energy in motion. It lives and flows. Money is symbolically a
golden, flowing stream of concretized vital energy.
-"THE MAGICAL WORK OF THE SOUL"

Develop a Prosperity Afindset

We all create our own financial picture. How we think and feel about our financial
affairs determines our experience!
When we first encounter it, this is a difficult concept to grasp. It's far easier
to blame someone else or outside circumstances for the lack in our lives. The truth
is, "as within, so without." The image we hold of ourselves-about any aspect of
our being-is reflected out to our external world.
Let's check out this premise. Do you entertain thoughts like these? There's
always too much month left at the end of the money. I have to grab mine before
someone else does. Opportunity probably won't knock on my door. If you take time
to rethink these statements, they all focus on scarcity. They define a world of lack
and shortages.
Since we receive what we focus on, when we dwell and speak about scarcity
and lack, that's exactly what we produce. Conversely, we attract abundance and
prosperity into our lives when we discard thoughts of lack and limitation and
replace them with statements like: I have everything I need right now to experience abundant prosperity.
True affluence requires us to live from the inside-out. When we accept in our
hearts that we are complete right now, and when we develop an inner knowing that
limitless abundance can be ours just like the air we breathe, then we discover that
everything we need and desire is within our reach. We can draw it to us like a
magnet, using our consciousness, our beliefs, and our actions.
We cannot control global events, or the stock market, or the behavior of those
around us. We can, however, command our own thoughts. The minute we affirm
and know that we have within us the potential to prosper and succeed in all areas
of our lives, creative ideas, resourcefulness, and opportunities will abound. Only
then can we claim our legacy of prosperity and abundance!

•••


CHAPTER

6

Jump-Start
on Charting Basics

If a stock doesn't act right don't touch it; because, being unable
to tell precisely what is wrong, you cannot tell which way it is
going. No diagnosis, no prognosis. No prognosis, no profit.
-JESSE LIVERMORE
Y~u

know how each one of your friends has a different personality? So do stocks! Just as some of your friends are quiet and
dependable, some stocks-mostly those listed on the NYSEmove in polite, conservative price patterns. I think of Wal-Mart (WMT)
and General Motors· (GM) in that way. (General Ele~tric used to stand as a great
example of a dignified stock, but lately that venerable blue-chip is experiencing
what appears to be an onerous, midlife crisis, and it insists on erupting, then
imploding without warning.) Mild-mannered stocks typically move in single-digit
price increases or decreases during the course of a day, and so move through their
cycles in measured, orderly paces.
In contrast, do you have friends who are moody, and you never know from
one day to the next which frame of mind they're goin~ to be in? I call stocks that
mimic this behavior, "manic-sleepers." Residing on either the NYSE or Nasdaq,
they can nap for days, weeks, or even months, then snort themselves awake and
explode into action.
Still other stocks continually bounce up and down allover their charts, resembling kangaroos on steroids. Most of these stocks thrive on the Nasdaq, are technology or tech-related companies, and are referred to by pundits as "high-flyers."
These stocks that behave in wild and crazy patterns are just like friends who act in
a similar manner-you can't count on them. Sure, they're fun ,to spend time with
for a few hours at a time, but if you hang out with them for much longer than that,
they drive you bonkers!

73


74

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

From now OD, when you study charts, it's fun to think of yourself as a psychologist. The stock is your "patient," and you are the "doctor" whose job it is to
analyze the stock's good points and trouble-causing characteristics. When you
learn to look at a chart with a trained, discerning eye (and you'll be able to do that
soon), it won't take long before you'll be adept'at judging the risk/reward, and thus
money-making possibilities of any stock you choose.
One glance at a chart will show you whether a stock has an orderly or erratic
personality. And from now on, the operative word is orderly. Memorize it, set it to
music. Make it your chant, your mantra. From this day forward, for our purposes
of trading multi-day and multi-week holds, we will focus on stocks that exhibit
orderly personalities.
Disorderly stocks are undependable; they exhibit little or no follow-through.
Playing an erratic stock skyrockets the risk involved and greatly diminishes odds
of a reward. That's called "gambling." No thanks!
Orderly, more predictable stocks may be a tad more boring to monitor and
trade, but a low risklhigh reward setup aligns itself with our goal to take consistent
profits out of the market. And, never once have I found it boring to make money! .

CHARTING ESSENTIALS: LINE CHARTS AND BAR CHARTS

Technical analysts use three types of charts: line charts, bar charts, and candlestick
charts (discussed in detail later).

Line Charts
Line charts typically connect a stock or indexes' closing price into a single
line, during a designated period of time. For example, look at Figure 6-1. The daily
line chart of Sun Microsystems, Inc. illustrates the daily closing prices of that issue
from August 2000 to December 2000, drawn into a s~ngle line.
Line charts are handy for comparing stocks to other stocks or indexes, such
as the benchmark S&P 500. Overlay a pertinent index over your stock's chart, such
as the biotech index over a chart of Amgen, Inc. (AMGN), and you can instantly
measure the stock's strength as compared to the overall industry, as indicated in a
single, straightforward line.
Many indicators and oscillators (overbought/oversold indicators) are displayed as line charts. We'll learn about them in Chapter 8.


75

JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

Daily

(left) SUNW - SUN MICROSYSTEMS

Close

Volume

65

60

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Figure 6-1.
This line chart of Sun Microsystems (SUNW) illustrates the closing daily prices connected by asingle line, from
August 2000 to December 2000.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Bar Charts
Bar charts use single, vertical bars to illustrate a stock's price range and
opening/closing prices for a designated time period. Figure 6-2 displays the same
daily chart of SUNW; only this time it is shown as a bar chart. Because it is a daily
chart, each bar represents a single day's price activity in SUNW's history.
In Figure 6-3, we'll "zoom in" on the single bar to interpret it. The top of the
bar indicates the stock's "high," or the highest price for the day. In this case, we're
using the price high of 50. The bottom of the bar represents the stock's lowest
price for that period; in this illustration, 40. The small, perpendicular bar on the
left designates the stock's opening price (42). The one on the right shows the
stock's closing price (48).


76

A

Daily

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

(Left) SUNW - SUN MICROSYSTEMS

Bar Volume

1OOOOOOOO~

I.

I'

.1••.

"""""""""""""""1""""''''''''''''''''''I'"~,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,.
Aug

Sep

Od

Nov

Dec

Figure 6-2.
This figure shows the same daily activity as the line chart of Sun Microsystems (SUNW), only this time in bar
chart form. Each bar represents the price action during the course of one trading day.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Although some traditional technical analysts still prefer bar charts, the
majority have switched to candlestick charts. For the remainder of this book,
we're going to use candlestick charts. They definitely shine more light ~n
the subject!
CANDLESTICK CHARTING BASICS

We owe a deb~ of thanks to a legendary seventeenth-century Japanese rice broker,
Munehisa Homma, who was one of the fITst Japanese traders to use price history
to predict price future. Referred to as "the god of the markets," Homma amassed
a huge fortune, and as legend has it, he made 100 consecutive winning trades. His
trading theories and principles evolved into the candlestick charting techniques we
use today.


JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

77

High of day
50

Closing Price
~48

Opening price

42-

40

Low of day

Figure 6-3.
Single bar.

Current candlestick guru Steve Nison, who wrote the foreword to this book,
earns most of the applause for bringing this ancient and highly effective technique
to the United States, and indeed much of the rest of the world. I highly recommend
Nison's books, Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (New York Institute of
Finance, 1991) and Beyond Candlesticks: More Japanese Charting Techniques
Revealed (John Wiley & Sons, 1994) for thorough, reader-friendly texts that
explain candlestick charting in depth.

Basic Candlestick Patterns
For now, we're going to explore some major candlestick patterns that when
used properly, can produce tidy profits. For example, Figure 6-4 is the previously
shown chart of SUNW, this time in candlestick form.
Just as a bar chart uses the top and bottom of its bar to indicate high and low
prices of the time frame indicated, so does a candlestick. With candlesticks, however,
we draw in a "real body" to connect the opening and closing prices. This gives us a
quick and complete picture of the stock's action and denotes prevailing sentiment.
The real body shows the opening and closing prices with a clear, or a dark,
rectangle. The bar that extends above and below the real body is called the upper
and lower "shadow."
When the rectangle or real body is clear, it means that the stock closed above
its opening price. When the real body is dark, it means that the stock closed below
its opening price. This gives you an instant picture of a positive or negative close.
Those of us who stare at charts for hours at a time find candlesticks are not only


78

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

easy on the eyes, but they also convey strong signals sometimes missed on bar
charts. Figure 6-5 shows basic candlestick formations.

Deily

Bar Volume

(Left) SUNW - SUN MICROSYSTEMS

2(
65

~
!
I

!
!

i
I

45

40

35
30
25

100000000

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Figure 6-4.
This shows the same daily chart of Sun Microsystems (SUNW) using candlesticks instead of bars.
RealTick grapbics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Candlesticks, like bars, each represent a specified time frame. For example,
on a weekly chart, each candlestick represents one week; on a daily chart, each
candlestick represents one day; and on a fifteen-minute intra-day chart, each candlestick represents a fifteen-minute unit of time.
Now, notice the long, clear real body in Figure 6-5(A). The long, clear real
body, showing the closing price multiple points above the opening price (in this
case, five points), indicates extremely positive or bullish sentiment. In (B), the
long, dark real body, with the closing price multiple points below the open, reveals
negative or bearish sentiment.
Next, check out (C). This formation, where the stock opens and closes at the
same price, is called a "doji." With a doji, no real body is present. Because.buyers


79

JUMP·START ON CHARTING BASICS

could not apply enough bullish pressure to close the stock higher than the open,
and sellers could not force enough bearish pressure to close the stock lower than
the open, it reveals a collective mindset of indecision.

(B)

(A)

I

I

I

High = 57

Close = 55

Open =50

I

I

I
Low = 49

I

(C)

I High=57

I

I

,/'

0pen=55

I
Close=50

I

I

Low=49

Shadows

High=57

I

~

I

Low = 47

Figure 6·5.
Basic candlestick formations. In (A), Bossy Bank opens at 50, closes at 55, with ahigh of 57 and a low of 49.
In (B), Bossy opens at 55, closes at 50, and again has ahigh of 57 and low of 49. In (C), Bossy opens andcloses
at 53, with the same high and low.

Please memorize the doji right this minute! It is a very important candlestick,
as it many times presages a shift in, or even a reversal
of, a current trend. As short-term traders, we need to
stay on top of trend changes and reversals at all times.
Why? Because they act as valuable entry, exit, and
money-management signals.
Candlestick patterns can be read alone, but are
extremely powerful when used in conjunction with other
charting indicators. Therefore, a selection of important
patterns are detailed in the next few pages, and in the
chapters that follow, you'll learn how to combine them
with other indicators to recognize buy and sell signals.


80

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

The candlesticks illustrated in Figure 6-6 are called the hammer and the
hanging man. Their real bodies are small, and can be either clear or dark. Their
lower shadows should be twice the "length of the real body. They should have
"shaven heads," meaning no (or short) upper shadow will be evident.

Real body must be
short, but can be clear
or clark.

I

"a.

Shaven head

+---

Hammer

I

Shadow = two
times length of
real body.

Hanging Man

Figure 6·6.
Hammer and hanging man.

When you see a hammer form in the context of a downtrend, it may signify
that the downtrend will slow and change direction by moving sideways or
reversing to move upward. Think: hammer it back up.
If a hanging man appears tn an uptrend, the connotation is evident right away.
It's time to start playing the funeral march! If you're holding a long position in this
stock, take profits right away. Figure 6-7 illustrates these two patterns.

Two-Candlestick Patterns
The next pattern that presages trend change is an "engulfing pattern." It's a
two-candlestick pattern consisting of opposite-color real bodies. The second real
body must completely "engulf' the fITst real body. Translation: The opening 'price
of the second real body must be lower than the closing price of the first, and the
closing price of the real body must be higher than the opening price of the first.
That's called a "bullish engulfing pattern." The flip side of this is a "bearish
engulfmg pattern." Figure 6-8 shows these two patterns in action.


·81

JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

II

I I
I

I

I

o·
Hammer

I

I Hanging Man

I

Figure 6-7.
Hammer and hanging man as reversal signals.

,

'I
Bullish Engulfing

I
Bearish Engulfing

Figure 6-8.
Bullish and bearish engulfing patterns as reversal signals.

I


82

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Bullish and bearish engulfing patterns are similar
to Western "key reversal" patterns, in which a stock
opens at a new high (or low), then closes lower (or
higher) than the previous day's low (or high).
Another important reversal pattern is the dark cloud
cover. Also a two-candlestick pattern, it portends change
when it appears at the top of an uptrend, or toward the top
of a congestion (sideways) move. The first candlestick is
a ~ong, clear real body. The second real body opens above
the close of the first, then closes near the low of the range
and deep within the price range of the first candlestick.
The deeper into the 'first real body (range) that the second
one closes, the more bearish the signal. Dark cloud cover indicates exactly what the
name conveys-a storm is brewing!
The reverse of the dark cloud cover is the bl!'llish piercing pattern. Resembling
the bullish engulfing pattern in that the second candlestick (real body) opens bel~w
the previous candlestick's close, the piercing pattern shows that the second real
body should rise at least halfway into the previous dark real body. The greater the
second real body pierces the first, the greater the chance that it is a strong reversal
, pattern. So, when this two-candlestick pattern takes place at the bottom of a downtrend,.look for a change in direction to begin.
Figure 6-9 illustrates dark cloud cover and bullish piercing patterns. Since these
are both powerful patterns, be sure to commit the simple formations' to memory.

I Dark Cloud I

I

Bullish Piercing

Figure 6·9.
Dark cloud cover and bullish piercing patterns.


83

JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

The harami and the harami cross are two-candlestick patterns that also indicat~ a trend change. Harami means "pregnant" in Japanese-the pattern consists
of a long real body that engulfs the subsequent small candlestick. The long real
body is the "mother" candlestick and the smaller real body is the "baby."
In this pattern, the long real body must occur first, with the short real body
appearing second. (The reverse of this pattern is the bullish engulfing pattern.) The
colors need not be opposite, but you will find they usually appear that way. Figure
6-10 illustrates the harami and the harami cross.

t
I Harami

I

I

Harami Cross

I

Figure 6-10.
Harami and harami cross patterns.

If you're thinking this formation is called an "inside day" in Western terminology, you're right. A Western inside day, however, demands that the second session keep its highs and lows within those of the preceding one. The harami does
not. As long as the fust real body is relatively longer than the second, and the
second is short, the shadows (session high and low) of the second real body can
extend above or below the first.
The harami pattern warns not so much of a dramatic reversal in a trend, as it
does that the current trend may slow or drift sideways
for a while.
A harami cross forms when the second candlestick
is a doji. That means definite opinion-strong bullish for
a tall, clear real body, or strong bearish for a tall, dark
real body---,-has dissolved. A doji, as mentioned before,


84

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

translates into indecision and uncertainty. Thus, a
harami cross can be a potent reversal, signal. When
you spot this pattern during an uptrend or downtrend, '
pay attention!

Three-Candlestick Patterns
The following patterns consist of three candlesticks that include "stars." Star patterns represent
strong and valuable reversal warnings. As Steve Nison
says, the formation of strong reversal patterns not only
keeps us informed of potential setups for entries, they also offer themselves as
efficient profit-taking signals. Why? Because if you're long (own) a stock, and
you see a reversal pattern forming that indicates the stock may make a V-turn
soon, you can grab your gains quickly. Besides, it's fun party conversation to
be able to boast that you bought a stock and "got out at the top!"
To qualify for "star" billing, the candlestick should appear at the top (or
bottom) of an uptrend (or downtrend), have a short real body, and gap away (open
higher in uptrend (or lower in downtrend) from the previous candlestick.
The co-stars: In the context of an uptrend, the first real body should be long and
clear. The third real body should be long and dark, penetrating the real body of the
first candle. In a downtrend, the first real body is long and dark, then the star appears
next. Finally, the third real body moves up, well into the first dark real body.
The Japanese call the first star an evening star, and the second a morning star.
When the star emerges as a doji, it's an even more powerful warning that a reversal
may be impending.
Figure 6-11 depicts the evening and morning stars and evening and morning

doji star patterns.
While we're. looking at doji, let's check out variations on this extremely powerful candlestick. Maybe we should call it a "dynamite" stick instead of a candlestick!
When you spot a doji-and remember, it's most potent forecasting position
is at the top of an uptrend or bottom of a downtrend-the following points should
be taken into consideration:
.. Traditionally, the doji opens and closes at the same price. But ifyoll spot a
"near doji," where the prices are within a few decimal points of each other,
it's still a significant signal.
.. A doji that appears in a sideways move, accompanied by other doji and
short real bodies, are not quite as powerful beacons of change.


85

JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

Evening Star

Morning Star

+
oI

II I
I

I

Evening Doji Star

II
I

Morning Doji Star

I

Figure 6-11.
Stars and doji stars as powerful reversal signals.

.. Doji can be viewed as more powerful at stock/market tops, rather than bottoms. This holds especially true when preceded by a long clear candle,
such as in the doji evening star pattern. Think: Long, clear real body
equals strong bullish opinion. Then, a doji develops. Doji equals indecision by market players to pay a higher price. Result? Possible pullback or
profit-taking may soon follow.
-+- Doji that confirm trend tops or bottoms many times tum into support or
resistance areas.
.. When a stock in an uptrend pulls back to support and then forms a doji,
that indicates the stock may be ready to tum and resume its uptrend. The
same is true of a stock in a downtrend; a rebound to resistance, followed
by the formation of a doji, may indicate the stock will drop back to the
downside. Notice the operative word here is may. Always wait for the
next candle to confmn price direction.


86

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Figure 6-12 shows two additional distinctive doji formations.

I Long-legged Doji/Rickshaw

I

Gravestone

I

Figure &·12.
Long-legged doji/rickshaw and gravestone doji patterns.

The long-legged doji has long upper and lower shadows, and its appearance at stock/market tops should definitely grab your attention. When a longlegged doji opens and closes in the middle of its session, it's referred to as a

rickshaw man.
If you think through what actually happened to form one of these doji, you'll
realize why their emergence is so meaningful. The stock opens at a certain price, say
50. Buying pressure pushes it strongly higher, then selling pressure shoves it much
lower. Still, it closes at or very near the session's opening price of 50. Conclusion?
Total indecision! Neither the bulls nor the.bears have the strength to raise or lower the
price above or below the open. Can you see how that may cause bulls to shrug and
take profits during the following session? Remember, the market dislikes indecision.
When you see a gravestone doji form in an uptrend, and you're long that
. stock, take profits immediately. Then, you can smile smugly and hold the exit door
open for the screaming stampede that usually follows!
In Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques, Steve Nison says, "As we have
discussed, many of the Japanese technical terms are based on military analogies,

6Nison, Steve. Japanese Candlestick Charting Techniques (NY: New York Institute of Finance, 1991), p. 159.


JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

87

and in this context, the gravestone doji also represents the graves of those bulls or
bears who have died defending their territory." 6
As you see by Figure 6-12, a gravestone doji opens and closes at the low
price of the day. If the price rises to a new high, drawing a long upper shadow, that
spells even more gloom and doom for bulls. Translation: No matter how much the
bulls absorbed supply, the bears squashed the price down to the low, and closed it
there. Remember, the point at which a stock or market closes on the day is a very
significant signal in itself.

Spinning Tops and High Wave Candlesticks
The final candlesticks we want to look at are spinning tops and high wave candlesticks (Figure 6-13). Candlesticks with small real bodies, of either color, are
referred to as "spinning tops." The length and range of their shadows may vary. Think
of spinning tops as slightly "kinder, gentler" versions of doji. Their siblings are "high
wave" candlesticks, which are spinning tops exhibiting very long upper and/or lower
shadows. A group of high wave candlesticks may forecast a trend reversal.

I Spinning Tops I
High Wave Candlesticks

Figure 6-13.
Spinning tops and high wave candlesticks.

In the previous pages, you've learned major candlestick formations and patterns that will alert you to changes or reversals in trends. Many more exist, and as
previously mentioned, you can study books by Nison and others for additional
examples and explanations. I find candlesticks an invaluable source of information
and if you continue to study them, it will be time well spent.


88

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

In the following chart examples, you will see examples of the candlestick patterns we just discussed. Observe how trends usually slow or reverse when certain
formations occur.

Daily

(RIght) GLW- CORNING INC

Bar

Volume

2001
I

I

100

I
I

90

I

f

tf~h~'f

\.

l~jl'+~~~9"t M~
t ~

~/t,~ ,
Itt

:
1

't~ttb'~~t'Qtij~
~

80

~t+~

+

f

70

TQ

60

'+ot6·.tl

r

'I

7

I

II.

!

_n

~

"'Q"9'~'QQ"QQ"~'Q'~,ij~Q"'Q'9""~Q~QQQQ"'O""Q"9"~"Q'QQQ"Q"QQQ9"'Q""Q'

ad

Nov

I

Dec

Jan

50

'O.t~

~

40

20000000

Feb

Figure 6·14.
This daily chart of Corning, Inc. (GLW) displays several candlestick reversal patterns: 1. morning star; 2,3.
harami; 4. doji morning star; followed by bullish piercing pattern, followed by evening star; 5. dark cloud cover;
6. morning star; 7. bullish engulfing pattern in context of sideways consolidation pattern, not as forceful as at a
possible pivot point in uptrend or downtrend.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

After looking at those charts, I'll bet my duck slippers you pointed to a doji
that appeared after an extended downtrend and yelled, "Hey, there's a doji in a
screaming downtrend, and the downtrend didn't reverse. It just kept going!" Or,
"Hold the ballgame. I see a dark cloud cover smack in the middle of an awesome
uptrend, but the stock kept going up."
My snappy retort, which you're going to read a zillion times over in this
book: "Nothing always happens in the stock market." Memorize it. Write it on
your bathroom mirror, your refrigerator, the back of your hand. No candlestick


JUMP-START ON CHARTING BASICS

pattern, indicator, oscillator, analyst's report, or
arrangement of the moon and stars can tell you where
your stock or the market is going to go in the following moments,' days, weeks, or months. What
they can do is give us possibilities and probabilities
of price movement based on history. The fact that
you will interpret the possibilities to infer one outcome, and the guy or girl next to you will decipher
them to mean the opposite is what ,makes the market
go 'round!

Daily

(Right) MOT - MOTOROLA INC

89

PoJl,,?pinning
tops, <and high.wave
candlesticks can aetas
suchpotent reversal
indicators when they
eme:rgein the eontextot/
anuptrend·beeauselhey
demonstrate indecision.

Bar Volume

2001

Figure 6-15.
On this daily chart of Motorola (MOT), several more candlestick patterns indicate change. As you can see, these
patterns are not "absolutes," but they hint at what may take place: 1. bullish piercing pattern, stock moves up
but cannot continue for more than one bar; 2,3. harami and harami cross; 4. bearish engulfing pattern; 5. bullish
engulfing pattern; 6. shooting star followed by doji, strongly indicates achange in direction; 7. harami followed
by bearish engulfing pattern, funeral music time!; 8. shooting star; 9. bullish piercing pattern; 10. if gravestone
doji at the top of atrend, asignal of possible reversal.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


90

A

Daily

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

(Right) MUSE - MICROMUSE INC

Bar

Volume
2001
110

100
90
80

70
60
50

40

5000000

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 6-16.
This daily chart of Micromuse, Inc. (MUSE) shows more candlestick patterns. What patterns and formations can
you find that I haven't mentioned? 1. bullish engulfing pattern; 2. bullish piercing pattern; 3. spinning tops followed by high wave candle moving sideways show indecision; 4. harami; 5. hammer followed by bullish
engulfing patter signifies possible trend reversal; 6. spinning top in extended bearish engulfing candle predicts
gloom and doom!; 7. shooting star followed by another bearish engulfing pattern; 8. near-hammer (technically,
it doesn't have ashaven head) indicates change; 9. bullish engulfing pattern.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

QUIZ

1. True or False? When presented with a stock chart that displays a disorderly, erratic price pattern, you disregard it compJetely and go onto
the next.
2. A line chart shows a stock's
prices, drawn in a single line.
3. In bar charts, the top of a vertical bar indicates t~e stock's
for
that session. The bottom is the
. The shoft, perpendicular bar
extending on the left shows the
price, and the corresponding
one on the .right displays the
price.


JUMP-START ON CHA.RTING BASICS

91

4. What does the rectangle on a clear candlestick, referred to as a "real body,"
indicate? How about a dark candlestick?
5. Define "doji."
6. What prevailing opinion or emotion does a long, clear candlestick suggest? A
long, dark candlestick? Which one implies supply? Which implies demand?
_
7. The plural of "doji" is
8. What does the candlestick referred to as a "hammer" look like, and where,
in a price pattern, might it forecast a trend change or reversal?
9. Describe a "bearish engulfing" candlestick pattern. What is its counterpart
in Western technical analysis?
10. Give one common characteristic of all "stars."
11. If you're long a stock and you see the current trading day is closing in a
gravestone doji, what action might you take?
12. What collective opinion do "spinning tops" and "high wave candles" indicate?

ANSWERS

1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

True, true, true!
Closing.
High, low. Opening, closing.
On a clear candlestick, the lowest point of the real body is the opening price of
that session; the high represents the closing price. On a dark candlestick, the top
of the real body is the opening price and the lowest end designates the close.
A doji is a candlestick formation consisting of upper and lower shadows
intercepted by a single -"crossbar." That means that stock (index or market)
opened and closed at the same price.
A long, clear candlestick translates into a strong bullish opinion. The collective emotion equals greed. Implication equals demand. A long, dark candlestick displays a firm bearish opinion. Collective emotion equals fear.
Implication equals supply.
Doji.
The candlestick referred to as a "hammer" consists of a small real body
with a lower shadow that extends at least two-thirds the length of the real
body. Resembling the common carpentry tool, when it appears in the context of a downtrend, it implies a possible slowing and reversal to the upside,
as in "hammer it up."
The bearish engulfing pattern is a two-candlestick pattern of opposite colors
that appears during an uptrend and warns of a possible reversal. The second
candlestick's real body will completely engulf the prior candlestick. The
Western counterpart is the "key reversal day."


92

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

10.

All "stars"-whether morning, evening, or doji stars-must open away
from (meaning higher or lower, whether in an uptrend or downtrend,
respectively) the previous candlestick's real body.
11. Grab your profits and brace yourself for the crash!
12. Indecision and uncertainty.

+++
CENTER POINT

What lies behind us and what lies before us are tiny maners, compared to what lies
within us.
-RALPH WALDO EMERSON

Reach for Your Highest Potential

Our planet, born of stellar debris, came together billions of years ago and has continued to evolve ever since. As part of that evolution from one-celled plants and
animals to conscious beings of expression, we are a unique part of life unfolding,
always in the process of moving to greater expression.
Because the urge to express our highest potential is innate and ever-present
(no matter how hard we try to ignore it!), it offers us the opportunity to participate
in the creative process in our own lives, to develop our special talents. We have
been given the awareness and ability to birth our being's greatest potential.
Indeed, each of us is born with special gifts that if brought to the surface,
developed, and polished, are meant to take us to new levels of personal growth and
fulfillment as well as to contribute to the good of the world.
Many times, we believe-even fear-that our dreams are selfish, egotistical,
or impractical. Consider the child, who longs to grow up to be an actor, and his
parents, who pooh-pooh that dream as selfish and impractical.
The truth is that by entertaining us in a stage play or film, actors and actresses
encourage us, the audience, to "suspend our disbelief' and accompany them into a
wonderful world of feelings and experiences we otherwise could not access. They
transport us to a time and place that transcends our everyday environment. The
experience may invite us to laugh, offer a life lesson, or simply alleviate our stress.
What a wonderful gift these performers give to us! Selfish? Quite the contrary!
Impractical? Certainly not. Good actors and actresses are paid for their work.
What does your heart want? What makes your soul sing? What is that inner
talent that longs to assert itself? Are you ready to claim it and give it expression?
it the answer is yes, you're ready to continue with your individual process of
evolution by reaching-and embracing-your highest potential!

+++


CHAPTER

7

Charting Close-Ups:
The Pieces of the Puzzle

A trader gets to play the game as the professional billiard
player does-that is, he looks far ahead instead ofconsidering
the particular shot before him. It gets to be an instinct to play
for position.
-JESSE LIVERMORE

Want to hear really good news without the usual "bad news" tacked
on? Stock prices only mov~ three directions-up, down, and sideways.
Why is that such great news? Because it underscores the simplicity of actual price moves. (Why don't prices move backwards? Because
time moves forward.)
The up, down, and sideways news gets even better. If you keep your losses
small and your wins big (what a concept!), you can afford trades to go against you
more than fifty percent of the time-and still make money. Hey, it doesn't get any
better than that.
We talked in previous chapters about uptrends (Stage 2), downtrends (Stage
4), and sideways price movements (Stages 1 and 3). Now let's dissect them to find
money-making buying and selling signals.

ANATOMY OF YOUR FRIEND: THE UPTREND
The definition of an uptrend is: a price pattern making a series ofhigher lows and
higher highs.
As I said in the last chapter, trading stocks in strong uptrends is where you
and I will spend most of our time. Swing traders target the two-to-five day breakouts in a stock that is beginning a hardy uptrend. Position traders scan for stocks
breaking out of a Stage One base, then buy and hold for the duration of the
uptrend, possibly four to six weeks.

93


94

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Stocks break out of bases and into uptrends for several reasons: Institutional
buyers (such as managers of mutual funds and managed accounts) suddenly show
interest, the related industry or sector gains favor, or the stock comes out with positive news and good earnings. The added buying pressure (greed plus demand)
shoots the stock out of its base and above previously formed resistance.
Figure 7-1 shows how a stock breaking out of a base and into an uptrend
will appear.

Uptrend (Stage 2) = higher
lows and higher highs

Stock breaks out
above resistance

Resistance
Base (Stage I)

Figure 7-1.
Here, astock breaks out of abase into an uptrend.

If you talk to a tennis pro about a tennis racquet, he or she will show you the
"sweet spot" on the racquet face. You'll find that spot in the center of the strings.
Hit the ball perfectly on the sweet spot, and you'll deliver your shot with delicious
power and accuracy.
As a swing trader, your goal is to capture multi-point "sweet spots" in each
upswing in a strong uptrend. The sweet spot translates into the. "middle" of the
upswing.
"Hey," you retort. "What do you mean, 'middle'? I want more than the middle
points. I'm gonna buy at the bottom and sell at the top!"


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

95

Let's be realistic. The wealthiest traders aim for the middle, and so will
you. When you buy, you want to make sure' the breakout is a healthy one, so you
wait for confirmation. When you take profits, you sell when you can, not when
you have to. Will you sometimes leave a point or more on the table? Sure. Do
you care? Nope! You planned your trade and traded your plan, and that's the
road to success!
Figure 7-2 gives you a quick glance at the swing trading and position trading
strategies possible in an uptrend.

Stage Three rollover
S\\'ing trader
takes s\\'cet spot

Position trnder buys at
breakout and sells at or
before rollover

I

Stage One base

·1
Figure 7·2.

Swing and position trading possibilities in an uptrend.

I've already anticipated your next question: "How can you make the most
money, by swing trading or position trading?" Answer: In a muscular bull market
that propels market leaders skyward, a talented swing trader can jump onto
stocks rocketing in euphoric uptrends and pluck fat profits. In a market rising in
a relaxed uptrend, where breakouts take more savvy and skill to capture (and the
discipline to jump out when they fail), a position trader who quietly plods
through the higher highs and higher lows, pulling a trailing stop-loss behind, may
actually come out ahead.


96

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

The best of both worlds: Take a position in a stock
when it breaks out, then, depending on market conditions, swing trade a portion of the position, and keep the
J\chart,isac:hart, is
remainder in position-trade mode.
acharttWhetherifs·.··a .
Here's an alternate way of accomplishing the
daily chart or athreesame goal. Go to www.holdrs.com.Click on
rnin~te/j ntra-day>ch~rt,
"HOLDRS
Outstanding," and check out the list of
thebuy.iflgcriteriaJor
entering atrade remain
HOLDRS. Each represents a single stock that trades
basipalfythe.same.
on the Amex. Choose a sector you like (for example,
the SMH is the semi-conductor holders), and use it for
a position trade. Then, you can swing trade one of the leading stocks in that
sector to maximize profits.
BUY SIGNALS: WHAT TO LOOK FOR

This section shows optimal buy signals for swing trading and position trading. The
basic pattern forms the foundation of all trading entries you make. You can use this
pattern on day trading setups as well.
Figure 7-3 illustrates three key buy signals. Read them like this:
1. Number 1 is the breakout over base resistance.
2. Number 2 is the breakout after the stock pulls back to support and
resumes its uptrend.
3. Number 3 is best used as an add-to-position point. It takes place when the
price rises over the previous high's pivot (resistance) price.

Buy breakout to
new high over
resistance
Buy breakout over
resistance

Buy breakout
after pullback

Figure 7·3.
Three key buying entries.


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

97

In the following chapters, you'll add bells and
whistles to these signals as decision support tools. For
now, though, please memorize the basic pattern.
Professionals and
Typically, both swing and position traders will buy
institutional·mahagers
the first breakout over resistance (see 1 in Figure 7-3).
utilize the "scaling"
Swing traders take quick profits by selling half or all of
method·all the time.
their position while greed and demand remain strong,
They scale in when
buying, and scale out
and before the first pullback begins. Position traders will
whenseHing.lt'sadandy
watch the stock pull ba~k to support, and when it
way of minimizing risk
"bounces," or trades over the high of the lowest pullback
while maximizing profits.
day, they may add additional shares to their original
position (see 2). This gradual increasing of a position is
called "scaling in."
Swing traders, who bought at the frrst breakout and sold before the frrst pullback, will now watch the stock for the next entry-the bounce subsequent to the
pullback (see 2).
Okay, stay with me here. Say both swing traders and position traders are
long the stock as it continues its uptrend and heads for its previous high. Both .
traders watch how it approaches this point of resistance. If it falters slightly,
swing traders may want to take profits in one-half or all of their position. Or,
if the market and relevant sector is screaming to the upside, they might want to
tighten their stop-loss and tune into how the stock handles supply (resistance) that comes its ~ay. Position
traders hold tight, and look for the next opportunity to
tighten their stop-loss point. You'll learn how to set
You've heard the
stop-loss points in Chapter 10.
oldsaying,UThetrendOis
Note: From now on, when your target stock gives
your friend"? It's the
you a buy signal, you'll enter the stock from .15 to .25
ab&olute truth.~oing
above the previous day's high. (This will be explained in
against aprevailing
trend. is like trying to
further detail as we go.)
win
.00 the. defense.. It's
Figures 7-4, 7-5, and 7-6 show stocks that have
alotofwork, and you
broken out of their bases and into uptrends. Check out
may get beat up!
the 1-2-3 entry points.


98

A BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Dally

(Right) WCOM· WORLOCOM INC

Bar

Volume

2001

Figure 7·4.
On this chart of Worldcom Inc. (WCOM), you can see how it broke out of afairly tight base on strong volume.
The breakout occurred on Jan. 3, 2001, where you see signal number 1. The number 2 buy signal is the first
clear candle after the hammer at the bottom of the pullback. The next candle rises over the previous high, and
when it does, it makes anumber 3signal.
Keep in mind that ideal bases take weeks to form. Bases lasting only afew days many times produce failed breakouts.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


99

CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

Dally

(Right) BA - BOEING CO

Bar

Volume

2000
60

58
56
54

52
50
48
46

44

42
40

38
10000000

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Figure 7-5.
On this chart of Boeing Co. (BA), you can see how it broke above atight base on June 28, with abuy point just
over 41. That was number 1. July 17, 2000, the hammer, was the low pullback day, with ahigh of 44.44. The
number two buy point was the next day, July 18, at about 44.50. The stock passed the number 3add-on or buy
point on the same day, as it passed that resistance point of 45.13. Both swing and position traders might hold
the orderly stock until it topped out before the first major pullback. The spinning tops and sideways congestion
pattern starting July 25 indicates indecision was taking over. Swing traders could sell easily at 49, gaining an
8-point profit. Position traders might monitor through the pullback, then take profits when the stock tops out at
60. You can see other swing trading opportunities after that mid-August pullback.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


100

A

Daily

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

(Right) FOe - FIRST DATA

Bar Volume

2001
I

!

~f~~

t~~tj! ~ft~

,b~,~ 9~, ~'l / ij I~

56
54

~~ ~t
~ ~~ :

"

60
58

52
50
48

I

46

Not a lower low'

44

42
40

38

Ii
j~"'Q'9"'i""'Q~""'9~'Q'i''i'9'Q1''9'i'V'i'T'i'''''''''''''''T'i''i''vy''i''i'''''9,g'Q''i''''i'9"Q'9ijOQ9'''9'''i'QQQ'i'
Oct

Nov

Dec

J

10000000

Jan

Figure 7·6.
On this daily chart of First Data (FOG), it broke above base resistance of 43.44 on Oct. 13. So, number 1 buy
signal would be on that day, at 43.50. Two days later, the stock began consolidating sideways. Remember, stocks
rest or correct, through time and price.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

HOW TO DRAW AN UPTREND LINE
Okay, get out your crayons! It's connect-the-dots time.
Now that you're playing a stock that's broken out of its base and into an
uptrend, it gives you a good sense of the stock's ongoing health if you draw a
trendline as soon as it has established two (higher) lows. First, when you draw a
trendline on an uptrend, you connect the lows of the pivot points, then extend the
line a bit farther than the price action to get an idea of the path it might take
("might" being the operative word). Technically, you can draw a trendline connecting any two lows (or any two highs), but this method is a bit more precise.
Start your line at the first low after the breakout high, and then connect subsequent
lows. Figure 7-7 shows an uptrend line.


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

101

Uptrend

Ba:;e

Figure 7-7.
Draw an uptrend line.

" Now, I already know your next comment. "Hold it!" you yell. ''You ignored
a pivot low and drew the trendline right smack through it. What's up with that?"
Hey, they're my crayons! Just kidding. When you see three or more pivot
lows that connect in an orderly trendline, that's where to draw it. Now and then
you'll see a low that doesn't coincide with the general channel line of the others.
As long as it has not made a lower low than the previous low, you can draw right
through it.
Here are some trendline tips:
... For our purposes, the best uptrends are formed at about a 45-degree
angle. Any angle steeper than that can result in a heart-stopping, gutgrinding trade. A price pattern that crawls up at a more shallow angle may
bore you silly.
+- When you connect three or more lows in a trendline, it's considered a
"major" trendline. Position traders may want to use it as a stop-loss point;
that is, if your stock drops below it, you take profits.
+- The trendline is broken the first time the stock pivots to a price lower than
the prior one.
-+- Can stocks in an uptrend rollover, make a lower low, then shoot back up
and start making higher highs? Sure. And, if you were long that stock and
sold it when it broke the trend line, you may want to buy it back. If you
do, treat it as a brand-new trade, holding it to your usual criteria.


102

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

TRADING IN A RANGE, CONGESTION, AND CONSOLIDATION

As we said earlier, stocks move in three directions-up, down, and sideways. The
sideways moves can be divided into three basic categories: trading in a range, congestion, and consolidation.
When we say a stock is "trading in a range," that means it is bouncing up and
down between a low price area, or support, and a higher price area, or resistance.
It is not trending. Most stocks trading in a range are experiencing a Stage One or
Stage Three. Another term for trading in a range is "bracketing."
In· "the old days," before explosive volatility infiltrated the market, particularly the Nasdaq, traders used to take great joy at finding a stock trading in a range.
Some traders called them "rolling" stocks. Playing these securities produced tidy
profits, as traders bought the dips and sold the rallies.
These days, trading ranges tend toward the unpredictable, even in dignified
listed stocks. Follow-through, meaning a smooth transition in a continuous move
to the upside or downside, may be rudely interrupted by market or sector antics. I
no longer recommend-in fact I warn against-playing stocks trading in a range.
Gary Anderson, veteran market analyst and author of the weekly market advisory service, Equity Portfolio Manager (www.equitypm.com). says, "Congestion areas
tend to be 'hot-war zones,' where strong and weak hands engage in active battle. At
bottoms, scared traders sell into the waiting hands of strong buyers. At tops, the
reverse is true. Strong sellers offer shares in size to late-adopters of the bullish trend."
Figure 7-8 depicts how a stock trades in a range.

Resistance

Support

Figure 7·8.
Astock trading in arange, held captive by support and resistance.


103

CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

When a stock trades in a range, buyers support it at the bottom of its price
range. When it reaches the top area of its range, however, buyers refuse to pay
higher prices, so it falls again. This is one of the most uniform examples of
rotating supply and demand.
The following chart, Figure 7-9, shows a stock trading in a range.

Dally

(Right) CSCO - CISCO SYSTEMS

~ j~

Bar

~ij'~ 'j~ t

~I ~tlt! ~!

Volume

70

~~

J

~ I ~ ,,~ ~ 'I~,

ft

~rtHfij

68
66
64

ij

62

Eccek!

ij

l~

60
58
56

50000000
Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Figure 7-9.
As you can see on this daily chart of Cisco Systems (CSCO), it traded in a fairly even (Stage Three) range
between June and mid-September. Note how follow-through at the top and bottom of the range was erraticand would provide ahair-raising experience!
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.
l

The second way a stock trades in a sideways price pattern is "congestion."
Think back to the last time you had a cold or the flu. Remember how your nose
was all "stuffed up," and you couldn't breathe? In the same way, a stock in a congestion pattern gets stuck moving laterally, in an erratic, disorganized fashion,
with very little follow-through, as though it can't breathe. You'll see this many
times in a stock experiencing a Stage Three.


104

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Congestion pa~erns form resistance and support. If a stock falls under a
ragged congestion pattern, that congestion will act as resistance. Why? Because all
those who bought at the high price area are annoyed and are just waiting for the
stock to bounce near enough to what they paid for it so they can dump it without
too big a loss. That creates supply. Conversely, if the stock rises above the congestion area, the congestion forms support. Figure 7-10 shows how trading in a
congestion pattern might look.
Please avoid holding. stocks moving in a congestion pattern. Day traders may
play them intra-day, but for our purposes of holding overnight, a congestion pattern usually produces losses. As I said in my previous book, "You don't kiss a .
friend with a cold, and you don't trade a stock in a congestion pattern."

(Eeeeeek' >

I

Congestion Pattern

Figure 7-10.
Astock trading in acongestion pattern, generally something to steer clear of.

Remember how we discussed the importance of looking for "orderly" stocks
to trade? Imagine holding a stock that's experiencing the same mood and manner
as in Figure 7-10 or in the charts that follow. Heartburn City!
Check out the stocks experiencing congestion patterns in Figures 7-11 and 7-12,
so when you spot the pattern in the making, you know to stand aside.
Unlike the congestion pattern, the next sideways pattern will become our best
friend. It's called a "consolidation" pattern, and it presents profitable opportpnities
when observed and played properly.


105

CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

Dally

(Right) PFE - PFIZER INC

Bar

Volume

48
47

46
45

44
43
42

41
40
20000000

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Figure 7·11.
Check out this daily chart of the pharmaceutical company, Pfizer, Inc. (PFE). Talk about acongestion pattern! When you see a stock start a disorderly pattern like this, avoid trading it until (if) it begins a clear
uptrend (or downtrend).
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.
l

A stock in a consolidation pattern moves sideways in a very tight price
range. You'll see this pattern most often in a basing pattern, or when a stock is in an uptrend and decides to go
into a "resting" mode.
Picture a pressure cooker-a big pot placed on a hot ' r'iS~tOGIKSllTU[)ltrenldS.;.
stovetop with its lid clamped on so it becomes airtight. The
superheated steam in the pot cooks the food. Now, if you
turn up the heat under the pot, the steam expands. If you
open the vent in the lid, the steam escapes with a loud
"whoosh." Were you to lift the lid with the heat still burning
on high, the steam and food would erupt into the air.

>.


106

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Just SO, a stock moving in a tight sideways consolidation pattern heats up in
a pressure cooker.' Bulls lift, bears squash. Finally, at some point, the pressure
cooker 'builds up so much steam, it bursts open and the contents explode into the
air! In other words, a jolt of rising volume-caused by good/bad news or market
activity-explodes the stock price to the upside or downside. When you're playing
a stock breaking out of a congestion pattern (assuming you're on "the right side"),
you can profit mightily from the price explosion.

Dally

Bar

(Right) STM - STMICROELECTRONICS NV,

Volume

2001
52

,

50

,!,

~

1,~

~I~ t ~

It tt ~ t !I ~~ ~ ~

I ~tij
0

Gulp!

I

,

48
, 46
44
42

40

38

!
5000000

Od

Nov

Dec

Jan

Figure 7-12.
This daily chart of St. Microelectronics N.V. (STM) shows one ornery congestion pattern! Can you imagine
holding astock like this overnight?
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

, Figure 7-13 displays a typical congestion pattern. When a stock breaks above
or below the congestion area (think "ledge" or "shelf'), accompanied by high
volume (you'lileam volume signals in the next chapter), it many times produces
a buy or sell signal.


107

CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

The longer a stock stays in a consolidation period, the more explosive the
move to the upside, or downside, when it finally occurs. That's why you'll often
read in IBD's "Investor's Comer" that price breakouts from bases that last at least
four to six weeks are optimum.
Figures 7-13, 7-14, and 7-15 show consolidation patterns. Once you learn
how to recognize them, bring up charts from your own source and scan for more
consolidation patterns. Each time you find one, note the strength of the subsequent
move to the upside, or the downside.

Deily

(Right) WMI - WASTE MANAGEMENT

Bar

Volume

2001
28
27
26

25
24
23

22
21
20

19
18

""

_~n

nn

i'

'Q"QQ"QQO'?"O.ij'Q,gO'Q""Q"yijg'QOQ?'Q,ij9Qu..uijQ'~",ij"'Q"QQ"QQ"'Y"Qg~
Nov

Dec

Jan

l

5000000

Feb

Figure 7-13.

This daily chart of Waste Management (WMI) drew some tight consolidation areas. Many times the real bodies will
line up neatly and you can draw through some shadows. Note how these sideways consolidation areas acted as pressure cookers. After afew days of consolidating, the stock broke to the upside or downside in apersistent manner. It
appears the stock is completing aStage Three. By the appearance of the last candlestick (arrow), I suspect the consolidation period in February will result in abreak to the downside and the start of aStage Four downtrend.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


108

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Remember, once a stock breaks down from a tight consolidation pattern like those
formed by WMI in December and February, the consolidation forms major resistance-think "glass ceiling"-and the stock may struggle when it tries to rise above it.

Daily

Bar Volume

(Right) ADPT - ADAPTEC INC

2001

!
i

'~ l,I~' ': :Yr,~;t f~: : :
,~ ijtt I 0~

" 't

19
18

17

.

~~

··.!lr"'yJpl······

11

,~~~,.,y~+1 ·..~t
~~ f,~ f

. t,. . .
T't

.! ~I, lij
!~~,,~~ ,

.. ~"""""f"
T+ Qt I u,
!.tL .

. . .~~~ . . r

I~I. ~

r t,~

16
15
14

13

12
11

10

:i
I
i

5000000

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 7-14.
Note the short but effective consolidation areas on this daily chart of Adaptec Inc. (ADPT). The first period
shown is also called a"pennant." Often, consolidation patterns are inhabited by spinning tops and doji, which
makes sense since sideways consolidation moves have acollective emotion of indecision. Just remember that
when the indecision pattern is broken, the move to the upside or downside can be doggone violent!
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

ANATOMY OF A DOWNTREND

The definition of a downtrend is a price pattern making a
series of lower lows and lower highs. Although, you will
probably spend most of your time trading stocks in strong
uptrends, if you learn how to sell short properly, you can
grab multiple points out of a stock in a Stage Four downtrend. In Chapter 12, you'll learn how to sell short safely
and profitably.


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

109

Since we usually jump out of short trades faster than we do those to the long
side, swing traders targeting breakdowns in the initial or early stages of a downtrend will expect to take the sweet spot out of two- to three-day holds. Position
traders will scan for stocks breaking down from a Stage Three, and then sell short
and hold for the duration of the downtrend, possibly two to four weeks.

Dally

(~Ight)

BRCM - BROADCOM CORP 'A'

Bar

Volume

2001
260

240
220

200

lao
160

140
120

100
80

20000000

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 7·15.
On this chart of Broadcom Corp. (BRCM), note how the consolidation areas led to dramatic price movement.
Once formed, consolidation areas form strong bulwarks of support and resistance.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Stocks break down from Stage Three rollovers for several reasons,
including: overall negative market conditions; institutional buyers becoming
disenchanted with a stock's industry or sector; company reports that show
weak earnings, sales, or high inventory; or other negative news. One time you
can always count on a stock tanking is when the company reports "accounting
irregularities."


110

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

So when a stock tops out, rolls over, and heads south into a downtrend, it's
because fear goads sellers (supply) to lower prices at every level in order to entice
reluctant buyers. The fewer the buyers, the faster the fear floods the market with
supply, and the more rapidly the stock falls.
Figure 7-16 shows how a stock breaks and falls into a downtrend.

Stage 3

Old support becomes new resistance

I
Stock breaks below support

Downtrend = lower
lows and lower highs

Figure 7-16.
Stock falling into downtrend.

OVERVIEW OF SELL SIGNALS: WHAT TO LOOK FOR

Since we'll delve into selling short in Chapter 12, the following shows a brief
overview of shorting signals in a downtrend. As you can see, the setups
resemble buying signals in an uptrend. There are, however, subtle differences
that we'll discuss later on. Figure 7-17 illustrates three key shorting signals.
Read them like this:
.. Number 1 is the breakdown from support.
.. Number 2 is the breakdown after the stock rebounds to resistance (supply),
then drops back into its downtrend.
.. Number 3 is the add-to-position point for position traders. Here, the price
collapses below the previous pivot low, or support.


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

111

...... Sell breakdown below support
····"2""···"·

,

Sell breakdown after rebound

Sell breakdown to new
low below support

Key Shorting Signals

Figure 7-17.
Key shorting signals.

Typically, both swing and position traders will sell short the first breakdown
below the support area established in the rollover phase (see 1 in Figure 7-17).
Swing traders will buy the shares back to "cover their short" within a day or two,
depending on the price action.
Position traders will watch the stock rebound to resistance. When it
"smacks its head" on that resistance and resumes its downtrend below the low
of the highest rebound day, they may add additional shares to their original position (see 2).
Swing traders, who sold short at the first breakdown and closed the trade, or
"covered" before the first rebound, can also sell short again at (2). Both traders
can add to their position at (3), as the stock falls below the support of the last low
and continues its tumble. If the stock/industry/market shows signs of rebounding
at that support level, swing traders might want to take profits.
The following three charts show stocks breaking down from their Stage
Three tops and dropping into downtrends. Check out the 1-2-3 entry points.
As you'll see on Figure 7-18, signals 2 and 3 may come at one time. A stock
falling into a downtrend can push up to previous resistance, then gap down multiple points. It can breakdown from the rebound and pass prior support-all in
one candlestick.


A

112

Dally

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

(Right) BRCM - 8ROADCOM CORP lA'

Bar

Volume

2001

I,ij'

260

~~,

240
220
200
180
160

t~.,

~

on!'1

fl ~~~ t
IQ~

V

~,

~

~~ n~

t~OH6. .o~u
,

~ , I'l
~, t hi

140

~t*.+.

120

T! +

~·Q~O

,

~

100

,

80

!

20000000

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 7-18.
Again, you can clearly see the daily chart of Broadcom Corp. (BRCM) as it breaks the low of its Stage Three of
196. 25 on November 7and falls to aIowan that day of 172.33. The number 1 buy would be as soon after 196
as you could get your order filled~this stock moves fast! The stock consolidated from November 9-15 but
gapped down again on November 16, quickly passing the last pivot low of 148 and giving both 2 and 3 selling
short signals.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics. Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.


113

CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

Deily

Ber

(Right) YHOO - YAHOO INC

Volume

140

120

100

80

60

40

Figure 7-19.
On August 28 this daily chart of Yahoo Inc. (YHOO) shows how this Internet power of old gapped down to
open at 128.50 breaking the support low of the base at 123 then continuing its dive that day to 120.63. Notice
how the old base then acts as resistance. You would sell short YHOO on August 28 (number 1) as soon as
possible after it broke 123. There are other entries for numbers 2and 3 but the obvious number 2 signal was
on September 26 when YHOO broke the consolidation pullback low of 105. On the next day. anumber 3sell
signal took place as YHOO broke the previous low of 99.75 opening at 102.75 and falling to 88 nearly 25
points in one day!
1

l

1

1

1

1

RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

1


114

A

Daily

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Bar

(Right) SUNW - SUN MICROSYSTEMS

Volume

60
55

50
45

40
35
30
25

100000000

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 7-20.
This daily chart of Sun Microsystems (SUNW) shows a definite Stage Four downtrend. You could have successfully shorted SUNW (number 1) when it broke support of its base low of 48, on the gap down day of
November 9. On that day the stock fell to 44.50. Numbers 2and 3came simultaneously on November 16, when
this previously popular tech stock fell past the previous low of 45.13 to 43.25. When astock falls for two days
and hands over a multi-point profit, it's time to take gains, particularly with a volatile tech stock. When on
November 24, SUNW closed on the high of the day (arrow), it's time for all traders to cover shorts!
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

HOW TO DRAW A DOWNTREND LINE

Still got your crayons handy? Good. It's connect-the-dots time, again. Just as with
an uptrend, you can get a good sense of the possible direction of a stock if you start
drawing a trendline as soon as it establishes lower highs in a downtrend. Connect
the tops of the lower highs, beginning at the first one. Figure 7-21 shows a downtrend line.


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

115

Downtrend Line

Figure 7-21.
Draw adowntrend line.

Remember how I drew a trendline in the uptrend right through one of the
lows? It's sort of like when a piece of your hair sticks out in a weird direction right
before a big date-and you get the scissors and cut it off. Well, you'll notice I did
the same thing in Figure 7-21. I drew right through the high that sticks out beyond
the rest. The highly technical term I use for this is "molehill." It's simply a molehill wanting to be a mountain. Notice that it's not a higher high. It didn't break the
downtrend.
When the stock does break the downtrend line by making a higher high and
higher low, then that trend is considered finished, or "broken."
I'll stress the following point more than once, so you make sure to absorb it.
A high-quality, dignified stock can rise in an orderly, stair-step uptrend that gladdens the hearts of swing and position traders everywhere. But once that stock
reaches the trend's high and rolls over into a downtrend, watch out! Downtrends
lean toward volatility, with the stock's price bouncing like a rubber rock. That's
why, as you'll learn later, when you sell short, you may hold the position for a
briefer time period than if you were long.


116

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

QUIZ

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Stocks move in what three directions?
Give one reason why stocks break out of bases and into uptrends.
Define "uptrend."
Briefly describe buy signals 1-2-3.
What is a swing trader's strategy when presented with a stock breaking
into a strong uptrend? A position trader's strategy?
6. Name three ways in which a stock moves sideways.
7. True or False? It's fun and profitable to playa stock trading in a congestion pattern.
8. Stocks correct one of two ways: (1)
or,
(2)
_
9. The longer a

sto~k

marches sideways in a tight congestion pattern, the
more explosive or less explosive the breakoutlbreakdown?
10. Give the definition of a downtrend.
ANSWERS

1. Up, down, and sideways.
2. A stock may break out of its base and into an uptrend because an institutional buyer(s) starts to accumulate it. Also, the stock's industry/sector
may come into favor, or the company issues good news, or announces
higher-than-expected earnings.
3. An uptrend is when a stock's price pattern makes a series of higher highs
and higher lows.
4. (1) Buy breakout above resistance, (2) buy first breakout immediately
after first pullback (consolidation) to support, (3) buy breakout to new
high over previous high.
5. When presented with a stock breaking into an uptrend, a swing trader
will buy the initial breakout and sellon or before the first pullback takes
place. The swing trader will then strive to take the sweet spot, or middle,
out of the upswings in the trend. The position trader buys the initial
breakout, and while he or she may add to the position along the way, the
trader will hold until the prevailing uptrend slows or is broken.
6. Trading in a range, congestion, consolidation.
7. Don't you dare say true!
8. Stocks correct: (1) by pulling back to support, or (2) by consolidating.
9. More explosive.
10. A downtrend is a price pattern that makes a series of lower highs and
lower lows.


CHARTING CLOSE-UPS: THE PIECES OF THE PUZZLE

117

•••
CENTER POINT

The moment one definitely commits himself, then Providence moves too. All sorts
of things occur to help one that would never otherwise have occurred. A whole
stream of events issues from the decision, raising in one's favor all manner of
unforeseen incidents and meetings and material assistance, which no man could
have dreamed would come his way.
-W. H. MURRAY (CLIMBED MT. EVEREST)
The Power of Synchronicity

If a single miracle takes place of which I have no doubt, it is the existence of synchronicity. Some choose to call the perfect timing of seemingly unrelated events
and people coming into our lives as "coincidence." Not me. Too many situations in
my life have been touched by synchronicity.
One cold winter evening, only an hour lingered before fifty guests would arrive
at my home for a holiday party. It occurred to me that I'd forgotten to bring the ice
chest up from the storeroom downstairs. Once in the storeroom, I found the styrofoam
container to be damaged and broken. I had no time to go to a store and buy another.
Frustrated, I returned upstairs. Suddenly, an inner voice insisted I take a load of
newspapers back down to the recycling bin. "Later," I argued. "Newspapers to the
recycling bin are not a priority. I have a problem! What am I going to use to hol~ the
ice?" Take the newspapers down now, the voice insisted. Annoyed, I grabbed an armful
of newspapers and trudged back downstairs. When I opened the recycling bin, my jaw
dropped. On top of the stack of newspapers sat the cleanest, newest styrofoam ice chest
a hostess could ever want! Evidently, someone had given it as a gift, filled with frozen
desserts. Now it had been "delivered" to me with perfect timing.
Have you ever spontaneously thought of someone one minute, and had him or
her call the next minute? Have you ever longed for an answer to a question, then
tripped over it in a book, movie, or conversation with a friend?
Underlying this connection between seemingly random events somehow is a
grand and harmonious plan. It weaves through our lives, offering us exactly what
we need, when we need it. Can you imagine how we would empower ourselves if
we learned to trust it and to access it?
When we believe in synchronicity, we know an exquisite rhythm reverberates
through ourselves, each other, and all of creation. As we give thanks for it, this intelligence supports us and leads us to our highest potential with flawless timing and grace.

•••



CHAPTER

8

Putting the
Puzzle Together

The professional concerns himself with doing the right thing
rather than with making money, knowing that the profit takes
care of itself if the other things are attended to.
-JESSE LWERMORE

Certain things in life are givens. At Thanksgiving, serving turkey,
stuffing, and cranberry sauce is a given. Then, according to our own
family traditions, we add the sweet potatoes, mashed potatoes, vegetables, and pumpkin pie.
Swing and position traders need certain givens. Then, according to your personal preferences, you'll add on bells and whistles (indicators and oscillators) that
agree with your trading speed and style.
But before we go on, allow me to briefly climb on my soapbox. Recently,
traders' mailboxes have been stuffed with circulars that make bizarre promises
like: "Make $15,000 a month in the stock market by working just thirty minutes
a day." Yeah, right. And I'm Tinkerbell. Then they go on to hit you with a set of
buying signals, using indicators and oscillators, without explaining the reasoning
behind them. They tell you "when this, and this, and this happens-buy!" Never
mind that you are risking your hard-earned money in a trade where you have no
clue what's really going on. Never mind that they don't teach you how to monitor
market conditions. Talk about driving without brakes!
Guess you can tell by this huffy discourse that we're riot going to do that in
this book. Will we give specific buy/sell signals? Absolutely! Are you going to
know why you're following them? You bet! That way, if a freight train is headed
in your direction ~ith its whistle turned off (stock market surprise), you'll have
the savvy to jump off the tracks before it arrives. Those traders blindly following
directions may not enjoy the same fate. Ouch!

119


120

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Okay, back to trading givens. They are: candlesticks, volume, and moving
averages. As soon as you understand how they work in a buy/sell setup, you can
add additional indicator/oscillators as decision support tools.
We've already discussed candlesticks, so let's move on to volume and moving
averages.

VOLUME: A MEGA-IMPORTANT INDICATOR

Volume is one of the most important indicators traders use to 'predict future price
direction. The ability to read volume signals will be one of the handiest tools in
your toolbox.
/
Have you ever gone to a 'party where few people showed up? Not very
exciting, was it? In the same way, when you're buying a stock, you don't want to
be the only person at the party! You want lots of people to attend so that the stock
skyrockets right out of the gate (breakout).
Think of high volume as energy being directed at a stock. This energy may
be positive or negative.
Can you hear your dentist telling you, "Only floss the teeth you want to
keep?" Makes sense. Keeping your teeth extra-clean means they'll stay healthier,
longer. When you water and fertilize a plant, it flourishes happily. If you don't, it
withers. During the weeks that you deposit money into your checking account, you
have the funds to pay your bills. No deposit, no bill paying. Conclusion: Positive
energy directed at an entity-hu~an or otherwise-causes it to flourish. Low or
negative energy causes it to stagnate and atrophy.
Stocks, especially, respond to energy. Human energy translates into volume,
or the number of shares traded in a specified period of time. By now you've
spotted the volume spikes that run along the bottom of the charts we've observed.
The spike below the candlestick represents the total number of shares traded
during that session.
Here are some general volume rules:
.. Strong volume equals strong conviction, which can be either positive or
negative.
.. Low volume equals lack of conviction.
.. Lack of conviction usually means prices will drop.
Note: From now on, I'm going to be talking about signals to the buy side, not
to selling short. So, please keep that in mind. (We'll tackle shorting signals in
Chapter 12.)


PUTTING THE PUZZLE TOGETHER

121

Now, as swing and position traders, you initially
look for high volume on the breakout, when the stock
trades over its first resistance area (lots of happy people
at the party). As the stock continues to the upside on
subsequent days, strong volume (if not quite as strong as
the breakout day) is desirable.
When the stock tops off and begins to pull back, or
retrace, make sure the pullback is on relatively low volume. Wh¥? Because you
don't want the selling pressure (energy) during the pullback to be as strong as it
was on the move up. If pullback volume is low, it means that many previous
buyers are holding onto their positions. If pullback volume is high, buyers are
selling just as hard and fast as they bought. So, the stock will surely drop not only
to its previous resistance, but perhaps below it. You don't have to stay at that party!
If you are long the stock when it tops out and begins its pullback or retracement,
and you see heavy selling pressure coming in via high volume, take profits.
Figure 8-1 shows ideal breakout and pullback volume patterns.

(2)

I I I I \tJ
I
I I

Breakout from pullback

I
Breakout above base (1)_

····r·····I·····.. · · . "[.. . .1.. . .·.. . .·..· · . . ·..·. ·..·..
Low volume on pullback
High volume on breakout --.

Figure 8·1.
Volume patterns.

.High volume on breakout


122

A

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

Attention swing and position traders: The, following volume tip is designed to make you big bucks.
When you're scanning charts to find stocks' building
bases, look at the volume spikes and locate a stock expe-

riencing increasing volume while the stock continues to
trade in the same tight, price range. That particular pattern indicates a strong possibility that institutional
buyers are quietly accumulating the stock and hoping no
one Will notice. A mutual fund, for instance, might be
buying up limited shares per day, so as not to make the
price accelerate until the order is filled. Of course, this
game can only be played until all the shares offered at
the low price levels are absorbed (supply). When that
happens, all heck may break loose! If you're tracking the stock like the stealth
trader that you are, you'll have your finger on the buy button.
In fact, this is one time (as you become more experienced) when you might
take on a tiny lot size (50 shares) early on, while the stock is still in the base. You'll
set your stop-loss extremely tight (stop-loss settings are discussed in Chapter 11)
to keep risk at a minimum. Then, if the stock rockets out of its base, you can add
to your position. On the chance that the volume fizzles out and no breakout occurs,
you jump out even.
Another volume signal for swing traders: After two to three (or less) days up,
if the current day made a new recent high and appears to be ending in a doji, star, or
spinning top (short real body) on low volume, it's a good time to take profits. Why?
Anyone of those three candlesticks translates into "indecision" on the part of market
players. Remember how low volume means "low conviction"? Indecision plus low
conviction equals falling prices. Figure 8-2 illustrates this point.
The final volume signal for both swing and position traders? When climactic
volume designated by a huge volume spikes near the end of an extended uptrend
or downtrend, it often indicates the current trend may soon slow or halt. By
"huge," I mean several times the usual daily volume. If you trip over a mega-spike
like this (you'll see some in the charts that follow) and you're holding a position,
take partial or complete profits.
On the chance that the climactic volume reversal warning doesn't play out, and
the stocl\ continues in a strong uptrend, you can always buy it back if presented with
a good opportunity. (You're better off, though, scanning for a stock 'that's in early
stages of an uptrend. The older the uptrend, the less steam it has left.)
CO,nversely, just because a climactic volume spike forms on a stock that's
fallen for several weeks in a pig-ugly downtrend, don't take this as an automatic
trend reversal and start bottom fishing. These patterns sometimes take a few days


123

PUTTING THE PUZZLE TOGETHER

to play out. (Occasionally, they even misfire.) However, if you're convinced the
stock is about to tum, you can place the stock on your watch list and monitor it
for a future base/breakout.

I

/

I ¥'

I'----------.----....

Low volume on doji star
warns of a pullback.

Figure 8·2.
Low volume on doji star.

Check out Figures 8-3, 8-4, and 8-5 on the next few pages for the volume signals we've discussed. Study the price action that takes place immediately after the
volume signal occurs.
MOVING AVERAGES: WHAT THEY ARE,
HOW TO USE THEM

Another tool you'll want to have ·tucked into your
trader's toolbox is the moving average (MA). Moving
averages come in three flavors: simple, weighted, and
exponentially smoothed averages.
For our purposes, simple moving averages work
beautifully. We're going to use them as one component
of our buy signals. A simple moving average is a line
chart constructed from the closing prices of a stock
(index, market) over a specified time period. For
example, a 20-day moving average equals the last 20
days of a stock's closing price added together, then
divided by 20. The procedure is repeated each day and
finalizes in a line chart.

Stocks that form
order6' bases with tight
price patterns supported
by orderly volume
spike§yi~ldthe

most
profitabJebreakoutsand
dependable·•uptrends.
BasesJashioned of
erratic price moves
fueled by Wildly variable
volurn~spikes many

tirnesprpducefailed
breakouts.


A

124

Daily

BEGINNER'S GUIDE TO SHORT-TERM TRADING

(Righ9 RBAK - REDBACK NEiWORKS INC

Bar

Volume

180
160
140
120
100
80
60

5000000

May

Apr

Jun

Jul

Aug

Figure 8·3.
On this daily chart of Redback Networks, Inc. (RBAK), you can see how volume plays arole in the price pattern.
1. RBAK falls straight down (!) on rising volume. 2. Breakout to upside on strong volume =bullish. Subsequent
volume on sideways consolidation is low-that's bullish. 3. High volume on next breakout. 4. Climactic volume
to downside on wide range·day hints at future negative move. 5. Lower volume on consolidation is typical. 6.
High volume on breakout is positive.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Moving averages are "lagging" indicators, because they use information that has already taken place. Because of that, they
are also called "trend following" indicators. They work
best in trending price patterns, where an uptrend or
downtrend is firmly in place.
Moving:averages
Major moving averages act as fantastic support
that move horizontally
areas. Think of them as magnets for price patterns. Over
are· notto·.be'usedas
indicators.lheyl1aveno
and over, you'll see a stock in an uptrend rise high above
predictiveValU~wh~h
its twenty-day moving average, only to tum and dip
theY,· fiatline."
down to it, use it for support, then bounce and rise again.
lI


125

PUTTING THE PUZZLE TOGETHER

Daily

.(Right) AS>< - BARRICK GOLD

Bar

Volume

2001
17.00
16.50
16.00
15.50
15.00
14.50
14.00
13.50
13.00
12.50

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Figure 8·4.
On this daily chart of Barrick Gold (ABX), you can again see how volume plays a role in price movement. 1.
When pullback has stronger volume than breakout (and doesn't tank!), stock is in for a long consolidation
period. 2. Strong volume on breakout =bullish. 3. Again, breakout on strong volume =bullish for swing trade
setup. 4. Mega-strong climactic volume in context of extended uptrend foretells trend change. 5. Notice how on
January 2, ABX rockets to previous resistance set in mid-December. On January 3, it forms abearish engulfing
pattern on high volume. (Alan Greenspan made a surprise announcement for an interest rate cut, which is
bearish for gold.) 6. Stock falls on low volume and inertia. 7. ABX breaks out on high volume.
RealTick graphics used with permission of Townsend Analytics, Ltd. ©1986-2002. All rights reserved.

Moving averages also act as resistance. Once a stock trades under a major
moving average, that average will serve as a ceiling, or resistance, to hamper the
stock's rise. This is especially true with a stock that's fallen below the 200-day
moving average. A stock that's tanked under this power-average usually puts up a
struggle before clawing its way back through. Conversely, a stock that dips to its
200-day MA, many times finds support on it.
The term "major" moving average usually refers to the brawniest ones ~sed
by technical analysts. You'll hear them mentioned regularly on CNBC and other
financial networks. They are the 20-day, 40-day,' 50-day, and 200-day moving

